A G I S:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is Ated at the
THEATRE.ROYAL,

IN

RUR R -L , N E.
By the AUTHOR of DOUQLAS.

To which is prefixed,
The STORY of the TRAGEDY of AGIS. With

OBSERVATIONS on the PLAY, the Performance,
and the Reception.

Tenec urarum Limen Erynnis,

B E L F A S T:
Printed by and for JAMES MAGEI, in Bridgc-firect.

M DCC LVIII.
V4---S S- _ /51C

# THE STORY OF THE TRAGEDY OF AGIS. WITH OBSERVATIONS On the Play, the Performance, and the Reception.

C33

THE
STORY

OF THE
TRAGEDY OF AGIS.

WITH
QBSERVATIONS on the Play, the Per-

formance, and the Reception.

Tenet auratur Limcn Erynnis.
A G IS, a good king, rules in Sparta, a folmer

sovereign has been deposed for his vices: he
is living ; and his queen remains in tlic place.

Amphares, a turbulent and imperious magiflratcl
plots with her tbr the restoration of her lord.

Lyrander is a friend of Agis: he is an Athenian
youth he fights his battles; and is viCtOrious.

A 2 Euanthe

E 4

Euanthe, an Athenian virgin, in love with Lysander,
has followed him to Sparta.

These are the principal persons.

Agis is ated justly by Mr. Molobp; Lysander glo-

rioufly by Mr. Garrick: there is all the delicacy of
the sex in the manner of Mrs. Cibber's playing Euan-
the.

Mr. Havard, one of the b el men in the world, la-
bours to appear sufficiently the villain.

Mrs. Yates performs the queen of the deposed king:

the part is of importance in the tory, but not much
in the person.

Mrs. Prichard is the mother of the king. Mr.

Holland plays a Thracian, Rhesus, who has served in
the Spartan armies from a youth; and his brother
Euxus commands a body of Thracians brought in to
answer the purposes of the conspirator.

The play breathes heroism and virtue.

Amphares heightens the ditrefs and trouble of the

action, by his love for Euanthe. His firIt object is
the deltruction of Agis; the next of Lysander; for a
double cause, because he is the support of Agis, and
he is his rival.

Lysander wins a battle, but leaves his troops with.

out the city. The commotions of the people threaten
Agis; who directs him to go to them, to be ready on
occalion. Love, and obedience to his mistress keep
him in the city in dirguife; mean time the gates are
{hut. There is an army of Thracian mercenaries in
the place; and he cannot get out. While he is speak-
ing with Euanthe, in disguise, Anmphares enters, and
seizes the lady. Lysander goes out for a sword ; and

returning

returning attacks the ravilher. The Thracians upport
Amphares ; but they will not kill Lysander. Amphares
holds t:is word to Euanthe's brealt, and gives the lover
the alternative to yield, or fee her die. Lysander
yields himself a prisoner.

The captain of his guard is the brother of Rhesus.

Rhesus attempts to move him, but he is undetermined.
Lysander wants to end a messenger to the king, who
is in a place of fanatuary: Rhesus accepts the office;
and he is discovered, and taken.

This determines the brother: he frees Lysander,

and joins Ilim. That hero has his ual success: he
conquers all opposition, kills Amphares, and pre-
serves Euanthe: but in the mean time the king, de-
luded by a tratagem from his retreat, is sacrificed to
the vengeance of the party. His funeral honours close
the play.

The moral is excellent. That the good of our

country is the firt human duty; and death hould be
despised when it comes in opposition.

The plot is well conducted; and, after the two first
ats, is sufficiently full of business.

The characters are properly Supported; and the lan-

guage is unexceptionable. It is in general majedlick,
without f pl;e pomp: and there are rome paleages,
which would have done honour to the Greeks them-
felves.-Take this example i " Amphares, having de-
coyed Agis from his retreat in the temple, and finding
himi, when in his power, disregard his menaces, fays
to him, You urge your fate: to which the monarch an-
fwers in three words, I SCJRN IT."

There is the fame fiblime in this that made the

Frenchman immortal. What Jhould i/c tldo fays some
one to Hoyatius, when his son was supposed to be fly-
ing fiom tliree antagonists: the old man answers, DYE.

A 3 The

C 6

The circumitance has more fury in this last; but the
answer of Agis is as heroic, and as noble.

After our applause of the author, the next is due to

the public and his friends. I have een more gaudy
audiences, but never o judicious. One might have
reckoned every man who honours rank by talte, a-
mong them; a circle very formidable to a bad author,
but whose applause mull to a good one be the firit of
human felicities.

C-T- muff not be offended that I name him

as a patron of genius, and of virtue. He never aed
more confifent with his characer. Why hould the
love of patriotifn, or the regard to merit, be confined
to one scene or fubje ? It warmed one's heart to fee a
person of his judgment and known difinterelted cha-
rater, conspicuously applaud, nay, begin the applause,
where modelt worth deserved it.

This is to encourage genius: there are its belt fp.

parts; and we hould cherish the few parks that glow
among our ashes. Advantage is but the econd object
of him who has true spirit: ambition is his firlt; and if
that can be satisfied, this author feels the perse& plcafure.

It were cafy to add to Mr. T-'s a long lift of names

of those who gave this play a fan&tion by their pa-
tronage: but a pitiful and mercenary world would
fancy intereited views; and call it flattery.

Among the ladies, better judges than ourselves of

what regards the tender paflions, the success was
absolute. It was easy to read in the countenance of
lady D-, perhaps the firit judge in our age of
theatrical performances, her perse fatisfa6tion.

In the next box, the heart perfedly joined this te-

flimony: a lady, overcome by the tenderness of the
icene, fainted. They

They

'[ 7 3

They fay the brealt of authors is the cave of envy.

I don't know whether having wrote this pamphlet will
give me title to that honourable addition;, but if it
do, there will be one exception. Nothing could more
charm me, than to hear that the earl ofB-, patron
and proteitor of every science, extends his jult regard
to a man injured at home by the too rigid, though
much to be reverenced and honoured piety of his bro-
ther clergy: to fee him tamp the bullion with his feal
of praise ; lead by the hands an unknown, friendless
and opprefled young man; who had no one recom-
mendation but his merit; procure for him the favour
of his prince, and give him that encouragement,
which is all the Briti(h want (but which they always
want) to raise them to a superiority over the whole
world.

The public unanimity on this occarion is more

strange. The theatre is a house in which majorities
are common ; but I thought the eloquence of a P**
alone could breathe into them all one spirit; lead over
to the fide of truth those who came determined in the
cauSe of error; and draw her voice from the mixed
multitude.

Indeed the sentiments of the play are such as ought

to make a strong and universal impression upon Britons:
and molt at this peculiar juncture.

" That honour gives the soldier only this choice,
victory or death.

( That kings are born for the good of their people.

" That it is happier to perish innocently, than to
submit to crimes.

And " that men never (liould repent of virtue;
though the reward be death."

A 4 The

_ E8 3

The people mud be indeed devoted- on whom such

sentiments have no effect; whom they do not warm
and animate. and inspire: but this we had the joy to
fee is not the slate of Britain. The whole people felt
their force; those first, :in whom such thoughts can be
mnoft useful, the higher ranks, the patrons of true worth,
and' the friends of virtue; but from them the fame full
glow of satisfaction and apphufe diffused itself to the
less elevated and refined: and if' ess quick in their
susceptibility, they were not less strongly moved. Their
eyes, their countenances, confessed the flame; before
their hands or voice expressed it: the scene brought
into life the power of the Orphaan lyre when in the
Argonautic vefel:

High on te flern the 7hracian rais'd his firain,

And Argo saw her kindred trees
De/cendfrom Pelion to the main.

Traniported demigods flood round,
And men grew heroes at the ftrnd,

Infpir'd with glory's harms.
Each chief his Jeven-foldjhild difplay'd,

And half unjheath'd the fining blade,
Androck., andfeas, and skies resound,

To arms, to arms, to arms!

These are the emotions tragedies flould raise: thec

are its true effects on a brave people. This is its pro-
per office ; and in this it is fcarca les honourable than
in the firit sacred service, the praise of gods.

It was not only in there general sentiments of virtue

mnd of glory, the universal voice of this Britilh audi-
ence, worthy of that name, diltinguililed the due sense
of the author's merit, orjult conception of the dignity
of virtue.

There were particular passages which charmed
them. Private vices appeared an objet capable of

ltriking,

E 9 3
striking them with as itrong impreflons as public glory.

The Prologue, not one of the usual kind, but

something much more proper, and much better, made
up in sentiment amply what it might be supposed to
want in that pert spirit, which has of late been he
charater of those appendages to the molt serious
pieces. The people received it with applauses of the
heart, much more to be desired than the idle, bafy,
and often rash, noire of hands.

When they who had not read, or perhaps heard be.

fore, the rigid Spartan virtue, fawv wives and mothers
arming the husband and the son for battle; and telling
them, that they would rather hear their death than their
dishonour, they caught the sacred flame without ex-
ception; and there was not a Britilh matron but for
the time was such.

I cannot believe the author aimed in any part at

personalities; for it is beneath his genius: perhaps the
pit made their own application: but something there
was said of men who aimed at enriching themfielve in
timeJ of general calamity and. it was felt severely.

Another sentiment that had, though not o suddenly,

its effet, was this: Dangers when necef'ary ought nt
to be /hunned. They heard it patiently; but when fonme
one named Rochefsrt from the boxes, the alarm was in-
slant and was universal: the applause was not limited to
that of hands, huzzas declared the Britilh approbation;
and the performance for some time was interrupted.

We owe acknowledgements to the manager of this

theatre, for an inprovenent on the conmmon praflice,
revived, if not invented of very late time, tile introdt-.
cing harmony to the afliltlnce of lense, and the relief of
a too long attention.
This play has hcwn a happy rfflce of it. He has

A i ctb:ainec.

C o ]

obtained the composition from a mater in the old
school ; who knows how to preserve the foul and
ftirit of that manner which rendered Purcell's name
so much eeemed; and to often the roughness of
its malter-flrokes with all the art of new-born modu-
lation.

The symphonies in the firIt ode are firiking, and

perfetly new (a Praise of no mean rank at this time,
when plagiarism is more common in mufick even than
in writing) and they have yet so much of the old great
Ityle, that could a pupil of that Purcell's have been re-
vived, he would have sworn they were his maller's.

The other excellence of that great manner was the

adapting the found and measure to the sense. I think
in this, Purcell, as he never had, never will have his
equal: but if his fame be threatened, with rival(hip, it
mull be from his hand who gave exprefiion to this and
to the other ode.

It has been said, the clergy hould not furnish the-

atres; and this author has, in an uncommon manner,
felt the weight of that unfair prejudice. Far from
having reason on its fide, the opinion denies the fRage
the means of its greatelt benefit, that of inculcating mo-
rality on its molt pure principles: for genius in others
is too much and too generally tintured with infidelity:
and it precludes those who are molt qualified to do it
honour.

Why hould not the Rage become the school of piety,

as well as virtue? It may, without the too free use of
appropriated words claimed by the pulpit. This au-
thor hews it may, and he has given a true sublimity
to many pafiages, from the sacred writings, where per.
haps few observe the glorious plagiarism.

Dr. BOYCE.

If

EC J

If any think men lets devoted to the Chriftian.doc-

trines, would give a fairer face'to heathen virtue, they
err extremely. This play affords full means of confuta-
tion. One inltance may he named, with which per-
haps few others of its kind, in this or any play, could,
stand in competiton.

Lysander, in his prison, reflects upon the (tate of man.

The author, as this character was pagan, gives him no
sentiments but such as suit those principles he mutt have
inbibed at Athens and at Sparta. He doubts, although
he hopes, a future (tate of being, He fears that man, as
he molt beautifully exprefles it, falls like the leafthat
hall revive no more. But his resolution on this uncer-
tain state of thought is the greatest the human mind can
entertain,

I will live to-day as if I were immortal.

Many have thought (for to few judges there are many

criticks) that the genius of Mr. Garrick is more calcu-
lated for comedy than tragedy: I don't know whether
his friends do not imagine it; but let those who have
entertained that opinion, observe him in thisfpeech. It
is a very finished one; and of a peculiar kind. They
will not think he excels what he does there, not in the
prettiest fooleries of the WIander.

Though it is idle to prale this sovereign of aRors, his

full fame not admitting augmentation; it would seem in-
sensibility to speak of the play, and not to have named
his conduct in that scene where he resigns his t(vord, to
turn from the bosom of his miltrefs that of the ravisher.

The conflict is violent, and the scene well worked..

We do not know which part to expec he will take;
and we are apt to blame him when he chufes to yield
him'lf to certain death, and her into the arms of this
bold ruffian. The cataltrophe flcews he did right; for
on this lepends her life, his own, his fafetv, and the

tlate's S

i I2 3

late's: but this we cannot at that time foresee. The
diltrefs is therefore the greater: it is not poflible, con-
fidering all the circumstances, to involve human nature
in more. This performer executes and expresses it all:
not his looks or geflures only, not the cadence of his
voice, but his voice itself, broken with anguilh, tell us
he gives up with his sword all that is worth his thoughts:
even tho' he prevents the immediate death of the be-
loved Euanthe.

Whatever we want in England, taste for amusements

is not one of the articles. Plays are the most inftruc.
tive: with good regulations they may serve the Itate;
and they will always tend to private improvement.
Vice is Co common in ordinary life, and o successful,
that, were there not the sage, wherein it is repre-
sented in its proper colours, men (for they frequent not
churches) might forget even its nature and deformity.

Those who fee there is this value in the theatres will

not fail to observe, that, to fulfil their use, they mult
encourage genius. The author no more than the fol.
dier, or the tatefman rulhes at once perfect into the
field wherein he is to shew his excellence: and the
public are in all inltances equally to raise, improve, and
perfec in their servants those talents which may be of
use to them.

'Tis thus true genius, thus candour judges: the

owls of criticism sleep in the day of splendor and of
beauty; but if the brigltnefs fade in any part, the
gloom, their proper day-break, wakes them; and ig.
norant of excellence, they regard only what may be
censured. 'is thus they beat down with their broad
heavy wings the fearful and weak infant merit: more
hateful than all human beings, except those who adopt
their doctrines.

PROLOGUE.

# PROLOGUE. Written by - Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.

PRO LOGUE.

Written by-

Spoken by Mr. G R R I c K.
IF in there days of luxury and cafe,

Atae from Sparta's rigid fate can please ;

If patriot plans a Briti/h brea/f can warmt;
If Kings aferting liberty can ch.rm;
Js Vi',tueJlill agratefel afpelt wear;
Check not at jgis' fall the gen'rcus tear.

'e view'd his Jubjefis with a parent's love:

IYith zeal to f.'!e a finking people lrove;
St rc.ve teir chang'd hearts with glory to inflame;
To m'ind their Iloral ; and reflore their name:
'Till Falion ro/e with lMurder at her fide ;
Then mourn'd his country; per/ever'd; and d'd.

That cuntry once for virtue war rever'd;

Adnmir'd by Greece; b haugl/ty Afiafear'd.
Then Citizens and Soldiers were the fame;
And soldiers heroes ; for teir wealth was fame;
Thenjor the Brave the Fair referv'd her ckartzs;
And/Jccrn'd to cla/p a coward in her armj.
The trumpet call'd; Jfe /eiz'd the wcrd andhiel;
A, rv'd in halfe her husbandJor the field;
,4nd si.'ing w hijrer'd in a fond embrace;

Re;wcnilcr! - death i better than difgra:e.

The idciw'd MIother J7fe:o'd her partini on
T/lc race o[' ,roy which his f're had run.
" My fin, thy fight alone fJl7aall deplore.
" Return vil oriots ! --- or return no Oii re

Whilc lbeanly thlis with ptriot zeal ccimbin'd,
And round te l, re:'d itad her vg r/Jle lwiin'd;

IVh ;//f

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

Whilfl all confejl the Virtuous were the Greats
Fame, Valor, Conquef, grac'd the Spartan slate.
Her Pow'r congenial with her Virtue grew,
dndfreedom's Banner o'er her Phalanx flew;
But /on as Virtue dropt her fitk'ning head,
Fame, Valor, Conquefl, Pow'r and Freedom fled.

May this fad cene improve each Briton'j heart!'

Rouse him with warmth to al a Briton's part!
Pronlpt him with Sparta's nobleftfons to vie;
7o live in glory ;. and infreedonm die!

DRAMATIS PERSONE..

AGIS, King of Sparta, Mr. Mossop.

LYSANDER, Spartans. Mr. GARRIC.
AMPHARES, Mr. HAVARD.

RHESUS, Tracians. Mr. HOLLAND.
Euxus, Mr. DAVIES.

WO N E N.

AGESISTRATA, Motherof AGis, Mrs. PRITCHARD.
SANDANE, Queen to LEONIDAS } Mn. YATES.

the exil 'd King.

EUANTHE, an Athenian Lady, Mrs. Cn3BR.
Senators, Ephori, MeIngers.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

A G I S:

A

TRAGED Y.

ACT I. SCENE I.
A court and hall, common to the palaces

of the kings cf SPARTA.

Enter SANDANE attended.
H ASTEN, ORONTES, to the senate house,

And learn if rumor's voice has spoke the truth.

[Exit Attendant.

The adverse fortune of an exil'd king
Pursues my lord. Achaia's generous aid
Sultains his cau'e in vain. Why ilk a battle,
Vvhen the continuance of defensive war
Sccur'd fucccfs and vicory in Sparta ?

Would

Would I had never left thy splendid court,
Delightful Sardis! to be Sparta's queen.

Enter AMPHARES.
Welcome, APHARES? Have the armies met?

Amph. They have. This morning, at the break of

day,

The Spartan army charg'd Achaia's host.
This and no more is known. Suspense and fear
Poflefs the people; to the gates they run,
Then to their houses: the ill whisper spreads
Thro'jutling multitudes the dread alarm.

Sand. Alas! revenge and empire now depend

On the wild iflue of unruly war.
What if the arms of AGIS should prevail ?

Amph. Although he hould, the toils of fate surround

him.

Dauntless and firm our brave afociates (rand,
And with impatience wait the deflin'd hour
To rush on AGIS. This unlook'd-for battle
Is but a solemn prelude to the at,
Which bold conspiracy will soon perform.
Tiis day shall terminate the reign of AGIS,
And make, 0 Queen! all power in Spart.l thine.

Sand. I fee that danger only whets the brave.

But yet, AMPHARES, if my lord is vanquiih'd,
Will not the conquering army awe the ciy?

A/ph. AGIS hall be the surety of our cause,

And hoitage for our fafty, till we wrelt
The sword from proud LYSANDER, if he conquers;
But that I fear not much. New to command
From idle Athens the mock hero comes,
Starts up a soldier, and a Itatefman too;
Each palm he claims: All honours mutt adorn
The chosen friend of vilionary AGIS.

Sand. May Mars dircet hii so to guide the war,

As AGIS rules the Itlate: And mutiny
Prove lhere as fatal as Icdition here.

A'.'ph.

Amph. This faaious slate mufl change its feeble form,

Waver no more beneath a double ;eign
Of limited, contending, useless i :gs.
Henceforth our monarch (hall in Sparta rule,
As Jove one in high Olympus reigns.

Sand. So reign the mighty monarchs of the Ealt;

And such imperial power, I thought, belong'd
To Sparta's king, else I had ne'er been queen.
Young, and deceiv'd, I left my father's court
For Lacedemon's miserable sceptre.
I did endeavour to extend its sway,
And to ambition rous'd my Spartan lord.
But the vain pupil of the Grecian schools,
Unprincely AGIS, marr'd the brave design.
Chief of the multitude, idol and slave
Of the base populace, he led the herd,
He urg'd their brutal fury on the king.

Amph. And now their fury on himself recoils.

Like the unruly elephant, they turn,
And trample down the ranks in which they fought.

Sand. That is their Liberty.
Amph. Let us employ,

And then suppress, such formidable licence.
My magistracy now is near expir'd;
A king's resentment and a rival's hate
Have long hung over my devoted head:
Farewel to place, to dignity and power,
Whillt haughty AGIS fills the Spartan throne.
I will not live obscure in Lacedcmon,
Nor roam thro' Grecian tfates a banilh'd man.
If I mull set, to rife and hine no more,
A fiery track Ihall mark my setting fun.
But AGIS comes.

Sand. And AGESISTRATA.

Farewel! Success attend thee, brave A M PH ARES !
I will not tlay. My foul disdains to hide
Its hatred or its Tcorn. (Exit SANDANE.

Atmph. Yet they who mean
To gratify these paflions, mull conceal them.

This

This day decides my fate. So let it be,
Such brief conclusion have I ever lov'd.
Aflift me, Hermes, God of Stratagem,
With artful words, to ooth the mind of AGIs,
And turn him from the track my purpose holds.

Enter AGIS and AGESISTRATA.

Ages. Alas, my son! that bold bad man I dread!
A.gis. e seems towait us. At thishour, AMPHARESi
I think that thou of all men hou'dft have shunn'd me.

Amph. My motive in attending here your presence
Merits a less injurious salutation.

A.gis I know thy merits, and I will reward them.

Art thou not author of the woes of Sparta,
Prime mover and inflamer of sedition ?
Ha(t thou not bent the power of thy high office
To the subversion of the Itate thou ferv't?
At thee this day my indignation burns.
I am dilhonour'd-.

Amph. What has di(honoui'd thee?
dAfis. Thou and thy pratices, they have compeltd me

To leave the noblefl (tation of a prince.
In time of war where hould a king be found
But at his army's head? There Ais Itood,
When you and your presumptuous Ephori
Required my presence here. Ungrateful Spartans!
Had you allow'd me but one other day,
Then had I fought this battle for my country,
And died or conquer'd with her bravelt sons.

Ages. Peril, my son! dwells not in camps alone:

In cities, palaces, and courts of justice,
With treachery and treason fie inhabits.
Peril attended thus thou mull encounter,
More hideous sure than in the ranks of war.

Amph. I know my ations have incens'd the ling.

But I imagin'd not that fich suspicions
Found entertainment in your royal breils ?

.'Ig *.

Agis. Halt thou not join'd the enemies of AGIs?
Thou who waft once his friend, inconstant man.

Amph. have oppos'd the council of a foe,
Whose arts depriv'd me of my prince's favour.

Agis. I hou halt oppos'd LYCU RG U S and the laws,

Which rais'd the name of Sparta to the skies.
The Delphic God infpir'd the deep design:
For more than human was that power of thought
Which join'd the publick to the private good,
With such perfection, that each felfilh passion
Flow'd in the channel of the common welfare,
And, like one family of sons and fires,
And dearest brothers, a great people liv'd.
In peace they liv'd without or Itrife or scorn,
In war they fought to conquer, or to die.
Equal and free, our happy fathers knew
No intere(t but the interest of the state;
No gain but Sparta's glory; proud they bore
That palm aloft, and Ihar'd the high rcfped,
The admiration, which consenting Greece
Paid to th' imperial virtue of their country.

Amph. Revolving time that fyltem overthrew,
And chang'd the manners and the laws of Sparta.

/]gis. The laws have been neglected, not annull'd,

And corrupt rulers have corrupted manners,
Authority will soon revive the laws,
And great example yet restore the manners,
In spite of tbofe who have opprefs'd their country,
Depriv'd the people of their antient rights,
And while the nation funk beneath their sway,
Still [trove for power in a declining kingdom,
Still fought for wealth in an impovenrh'd land.
Even at this hour rapacious they perfilt,
And, like some wretches in a (Iranded veflll,
Plunder and riot in the midit of ruin.

Amph. Mov'd by the present perils of the Itate,

This lignal hour I chore, unknown as yet
The fortune of the field, to change my condut,
And make an offer of my aid to AGIs,

Agir.

Agis. If I hould judge the future by the pafl,
Thou must forgive me, tho' Idoubt thy faith.

Age. Yet hear him, AcGI: in an hour like this
He who assistance offers is a friend.

.gis. This hour may yet deceive their country's foes.

I know the base foundation of that hope
Which makes my baffled enemies presume.
LYSANDER'S army in its ranks contains
The belt and bravest of Laconia's sons;
The facion wilh and hope defeat to them,
That Sparta's generous youth may ne'er return
To guard that freedom which has made them brave.

Amph. The boldness of their hopes their deeds will

prove
In the assembly, if Achaia conquer.

Age. AMPHARES, fay, what is their utmost aim
Amph. The old dependants of the etii'd king,

And all the venal members of the ltate,
Won by S x D AN E's arts and foreign gold,
Aim to restore LE,)NIDAS, who conies
With hostile armies to enslave his country:
Therefore S. DANE'S proffers I reje&ed,
Have warn'd the king, and would have serv'd him too;
But since resentment and diltrult prevent me,
Neutral I Itand, and will not seek that welcome
Which his more artful enemies would give.

4gis. Thou fpeak'lt more boldly than becomes A.-.

PHARES.

Add that to the offences I forgive.
It is the sacred maxim of my reign,
That in a prince's consecratcd brealt
Revenge and anger (hould not long remain.
These palions in a king affli& the (tate,
By driving rafln offenders to despair.
This day decides your character with me.
Now let your acions prove your words lincere.

Amph. No other terms I alk, and flre I am
Ne'er hall AMPHAREs need again forgiveness.

Exit AMlPHARES.

/lannt

Manent AGIS and AGESISTRATA.

Agis. Well has he judg'd the fenfon of fubmiflion.
He will affilt us if LYSANDER conquers.

Age4. May Jove avert the evils which I fear!

I dread the ruin of the Spartan Itate,
And fear the downfal of our antient house.
The blackest fury of the Stygian realm,
The molt deltruCtive, is infernal Discord.
Bath'd in the blood of kings the walks this world,
And tumbles Htates and empires to the ground.

Agis. Nations oft perifi by their princes crime;

But now if Sparta's antient state mull fall,
Gods and good men shall witness for its king,
That he with fate contended for his people,
And on the ruins of their virtue fell.

Ages. Think not I mean to blame your high de-

sign,

Age has not chang'd the tenor of my mind,
Nor pall'd my admiration of true glory.
Sprung, like thy father, from Alcides' blood,
I feel the spirit of the Spartan line.
Only let me adjure thee to beware,
And walk with caution thro' surrounding perils.
Tho' thou defpifeft every form of danger,
Think what a helpless train attends on thee,
An aged mother, and an infant son.

Agis. Divine Alcides will prote& his race.
Ages. I will invoke the God; in times like these

Prayers are the arms of our defenceless sex,
A spotless choir of matrons and of virgins,
Who o'er their country mourn, myself will lead
To the high temple of the son of Jove.
He yet may hear the voice of supplication,
And {tretch his arm to save the Spartan Ilate.

[Exit AGESISTRATA.
igif. (alone.) Without the enemy; within, the sac-

tion.
What hou'd I think? I have a thousand thoughts

That

That rife and fall like waves upon the shore.
I need thee now, LYSAND R ! 0 my friend!
I lean on thee, and thou perhaps art fall'n.
Ye ever-living gods, who know my heart,
I trust in you, for righteous are my thoughts,
All bent on raising up long-proltrate Sparta.
With Sparta too, I would be proud to rife,
And gain such glory as my fathers gain'd,
When Persia's tyrant trembled at their arms.
If in this jiuR ambition I Ihould perish,
My name Ihall go to nations yet unborn.
But I must change my train; EUANTHE comes.
Alas, LYSANDER, led by love and thee,
She left her Athens for this land of broils.

Enter EUANTHE.

Euan. No tidings from the camp?
A.gif. None, fair EUANTHE.

If we had loft the field, the flying rout
Ere this had reach'd our gates.

Egan. Oh! many a dame,

Matron and virgin, tremble at this hour;
But who has cause like mine? The molt forlorn
And desolate of women is E ANTHE !
If ·

Agis. Small the chance of what EUANTHE fears:

In the long wars of ill-contending Greece
Leaders of armies have but rarely fallen.

Euan. One thing I know, and with prophetic tongue

I speak it, Prince! if Sparta triumph not,
Ne'er fliall your eyes again behold Ls ANDE R.
Disdain in him is fatal as despair.

Agis. When he returns victorious from the field,

Then ihall he hear who best has spoke his praise.
But I must leave you ow: The senate waits me.
Hereafter we fliall speak of this, and smile
Like mariners who on the peaceful shore
sit, and with pleasure talk of tempelts pall

(Exit AIs.

Etia.

Euan. (alone.) This Itedfait ease is all alfum'd, I

fee;

He taggers at the imminent event.
How dreadful is this interval to me,
Who am bereft and destitute of all
Those aids that tay afflicion; and must bear
The weight of woe that's heavier every hour.
The queen, and generous AGIS too, discharge
The dues of kindred with unfeigned love.
But our acquaintance is not old enough,
To yield a ripen'd sympathy, whose talte
Alone can comfort such a mind as mine.
Yet I repent me not in this extreme,
That I forsook my country and my friends.
They would have forc'd me to a loathed bed,
And torn me from the noblest of mankind.
If he hould fall ! my love! my only love!
Shall I survive thee; and return to Athens,
Be humbled there before my haughty kindred,
And hear them blame the ahes of LYSANDER?
Forbid it, fearless love! forbid it, hame!
Forbid it, honour, and my nature's pride;
Death Ihall forbid it, sorI dare to die.

Enter RHESUS.

Euan RHESUS, Great Gods! Oh fay, how fares
LYSANDER?

Rhef. As well as glorious victory can make him.
Euan. Forgive my rash derpair, my thanks accept,

Ye gracious powers who guard his darling brealt.
Where is he now?

Rhef. With AGIS in the senate.
Euan. Already here; blest be the Gods of Greece?
Rhe:f Soon as the trumpet from pursuit recall'd

Our conquering Spartans, in the field arriv'd
A weary meflenger, by AGIS sent;
LY SANDER (trait bespoke the royal band:
" With all the peed of men to Sparta hatle,
" Chafife bold treason, and defend your king,"

He

He said; and call'd to me. With a few horse
I follow'd him: And when he fought the king,
By his command to you I brought these tidings.

Euan. Molt welcome, RHESUS. But has Sparta

loft
None of her noble youth?

Rhef. No man of note

Fell in the field but one, whose loss you'll mourn,
IYSANDER'S friend, Athenian POLYDORUS.

Euan. Alas! alas! my joy is mix'd with woe.

Unhappy youth! on my ill-omen'd head
The blame of thy untimely death will fall.
Conducting me, thou cam'ft to dillant Sparta.
Fatal the honours Sparta's king beltow'd
Upon the generous guardian of EUANTHE.

Rhef. Lady, the people of my native land,

The warlike Thracians, hold it vain to mourn
For men who fall in battle; such they deem
The favourites of MARS, our country's God.
Those they bewail who die by dire disease,
Of youth and vigour full. But most of all
Lament old men, who drink the bitter dregs
Of life and woe, and in decripit age
(Extremity of dotage) with to live.

Euan. Who are thof men who near the temple

fland?
Uncouth to me their garb, and firange their arms.

Rhef. They are Thracians, lady.
Euan. What seek they here?
Rh. I will accolt the herald,
And learn his business.

Euan. To the palace, RHESUS,

I go the willing messenger of joy.
This vitory will free the anxious Queen
From many fears. I pray thee do not tarry,
But come and tell me what yon herald bears,
And what affairs still occupy the senate.

Rhef. Depend on the unwearied zeal of RHESUS.

(Exit RHESUS.

Manet.

Alanet EUANTHE.

AGIS and Sparta, and the public cares,
Detain LYSANDER from my longing eyes.
I fee the happy change of my condition,
And hare the triumphs of the man I love.
But yet the slightest circumstance creates
New fears to me. Why lingers thus LYSANDER !
My mind is not at relf; the winds are hush'd,
But dill my bosom quivers from the storm.

[Exit EUANTHE.
End of the frfl Aa.

B .ACT

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT II. SCENE I
Euan. T"HEIR tedious council now is at an

jL . end,

And surely he will haften to EANTHE.
What means this clamour?

[Shout of the people behind the Scenes.

Ha! he comes, he comes?

Loud acclamations and the voice of joy
Proclaim the hero.

Enter LYSANDER.

Lyf. O my life! my love!

To meet thee here is happiness compleat.
The gods have blest me to my utmolt wilh,
And brought me full of glory to EUANTHE.

Euan. Thanks to the Gods who have preerv'd LY-

SANDER.
Athenian Pallas sure has heard my prayers.

Lyf. And mine; for mutual is the lover's prayer.

Another deity I now invoke,
Whose rites the god of war has long delay'd,
With peace well-pleas'd hall golden Hymen come,
And crown at lalt our long eventful love.

Euan. Speak not of Hymen now: his torch fr

me
He shall not light, whilfl cruel Discord waves

Her

Her horrid brand, and whilst unburied lies
Thy friend and mine, the generous POLYDORUS.

Lyf Tho' love and glory both my breatt inspire,

And fortune smiles on both, yet sorrow finds
A place to fit in: but 'tis temper'd sorrow;
For never Grecian hero greater died.

Euan. He fell the victim of his love to thee;

He follow'd thee when thou forfook'lt EUANTHE,
Left me the day I touch'd the Spartan hore,
Tho' royal AGIS begg'd thee to remain.

Lyf. Unjust EUANTHE, thus to blame LYSAM-

DER

Who fought the field, the soldier of his love
As of his sacred country : fought to gain,
With liberty, a rank and place of honour,
Such as becomes the huiband of Eu A NTHE;
That tender name, and names that wait upon it,
Awake emotions as implacable
To tyranny, as generous and great,
As ever felf-renouncing hero own'd.
When the chief aim is right, all pafllons elre
Of noble kind impel the self-same way.
The lover and the husband route and fire
The Spartan and the man.
Of common clay, and in one common mould
Mankind are made; but the celeflial fire
That gives them life and foul, is liberty.
And I, Prometheus like, to gain that fire
For Sparta's sons, would brave the bolt of Jove.

Euan. To me you need not vaunt your daring

mind.

Alas! LYSANDER ? I am till afraid
Of perils lurking in this troubled (late.
O leave me not again to grief and fear,
And to AMPHARES.

Lyf. Leave thee to A MPHIARES?
Euan. Yes, in thy absence he did talk of love,
Boa/ted his wealth, his clients, and his power;

13 2 Mention',

Mention'd the ruin of thy father's fortunes,
And spoke contemptuous of thy ralh designs.

Lyf. Immortal gods! Did I not hate this man
Enough ?

Enter a HELOT.
Whence, HELOT ?

Helot. Lord, from Celimene.

(Delivers a Letter.)

Lyf. (reads.) Let AGISfiandupon his guardto day,

This to LYSANDER from a faithful Jriend.-.
Helot, return, and tell the noble dame
That the remembrance of her generous mind
Shall live for ever in my grateful breast.

Euan. Who is this faithful friend ?
Ijf. A Spartan dame,

A gentle one, tho' wedded to a foe
Of royal AGIS. In her virgin (tate
She was the conltant and the lov'd companion
Of fair DEIDAMIA, AGIS' Ihort-liv'd queen.
Thro' all our various (trife, the generous dame
Preserves the friendships of her early days.
The scroll the king mult fee. Farewel, EA NTHE.

Euan. Its threatning ltrain awakes my former

fears.

Would you had been, like me, content with love,
And never left Ilyfrus' flowery banks!
A fairer garland there you might have won,
Than ever war bellow'd, th' immortal wreath
Of PALLAS, queen of arts as well as arms.
But you forsook the vale, and left the hade
To climb ambition's bare and rocky height,
To (tand the (torms and tempets of the world.

Lyf. Your words, like melancholy music, take

My lill'ning ear, and cause delusive sadness;
For vain the malice of our baffled foes,
And impotent will prove their last endeavours;
Pall are the ltorms and tempelts of our fortune;

Let

Let not EUANTHE heed the rack of clouds,
Nor dread the murmurs of the falling main.

Euan. Elate with vi&ory, you scorn your foes.

I wish that RHESUS would return again
Before you go to AGIS.

Lyf. Where is RHEsus?
Euan. I saw obme warriors clad in horrid arms

Near yonder temple (tand. Strait RHEsus knew
The garb and arms of his own native Thrace.
And, wond'ring at the fight, went forth to learn
Who and from whence they were.

Lyf. That should be known.

In yonder temple fit the Ephori,
Those factious magiltrates who love not AGIS.
If RHESUS come to you, detain him not;
Our resolutions may on him depend.

Eu.m. LYSANDER, flay; you go again to AGIS,

Perhaps to plan new perils to thy life;
If so, by all that's sacred I conjure thee
To let me know your purpose. Speak with me
Before you execute what you resolve.
The image of the lern AMPHARES haunts me;
Need I intreat thee to defend me from him ?

L.yf No! by the Gods! O urge me not,. EUAN-

THE !'

Nor rouLe those thoughts a lover cannot bear.
Defend thee from AMPHARES! 0 my fair !
When thou art wrong'd, LYSANDER lives no more !
But fee the king.

Euan. Let caution shew your love.

LYSANDER goei off towards that fide

of the lage where AGIs appears

Manet EUANTHE.

If nature teaches me aright to read
The mind of nian, this is a powerful fpcll
To charm the daring spirit of LSANDER,
And make him think of me as well as Sparta.

[Exit EUANTHE.
B 3 Enter

Enter AGIS.

Ljy: Regard, 0 king, the warnings of a friend

InltrudCed in the counsels of thy foes.
Behold the Itedfalt faith of CELIMENE.

Gives the letter.

geis. I cannot think o barely of the people.

For them I have unplum'd the regal power,
And deck'd their freedom with the spoils of kings.
If they betray me; of all creatures, man
Is most ungrateful to his benefa&or.
The generous courser and the faithful dog
With true affetion love their gentle matter;
Nay even the heavy ox, the itubborn mule,
Dullelt of beasts, they know the hand that feeds

them.

Lyf. Humanity lives in thy breat, 0 king !

And dictates confidence unlimited.
Virtue approves the generous extreme,
And magnanimity this error loves.
Let private men indulge the glorious fault,
And set their lives and fortunes on the faith
And gratitude of those they have oblig'd;
But let feverer prudence guard the heart
Of him wholi brows are circled with a crown,

Enter an OFFICER.

Ofic. 0 King! the captain of Angycla's gate

Informs you that he has this hour descried
A band of men who halted near his polt;
A thousand Thracians, they report themselves,
Hir'd by AMPH'ARES for SELEUCUS' service.

Agis.

Agis. A thousand Thracians!
Offi. On their march to Sardis.
Ly./ By whose permifflon do they march this way ?
Ofi. Before the troops arrivd, a herald came
Who to the Ephori a meflage b6re.

Agis. Your diligence in duty I commend.

[Exit OFFICER.
Lyf. The veil's withdrawn, and treason t(ands re-

veal'd.

Ne'er shall ArPHARES need again forgiveness.
With what a double tongue the traitor spoke !
All-feeing Gods ! how little do we know
The greatness of those blessings you confer.
Had we not fought to day, had we not conquer'd,
AGIS and Sparta had been loft forever.

4gis. This victory came like the bolt of Jove,
And levell'd their defsgns.

Lyj. Yet if they dare

The worlt of crimes, their treason may succeed.
Your troops, your conquering troops, are not ar-

riv'd ;

Th' assembly meets; unguarded there you (land;
What keeps the traitors from your noble life?

Agis. My life! LYSANDER. No, I fear not that.

The ancient annals of this land record,
That barbarous foes revere the race divine,
And turn in battle from a Spartan king.

Lyf. The multitude may (till revere their lord,

Who from the blood of great Alcides springs;
And yet some impious hand may Itrike the prince,
Altho' of virtue as of race divine.

Agis. I'll change the guards, and place at ev'ry gate
Some men of trult.

Iyf. Mount your Theflalian (teed,

And meet the troops that halten to your aid.
With eager (teps the royal band advance,
And wilh for nothing but their king to lead them.
Then if the furies in their wrath provoke

B 4 Your

Your foes to rife in arms, let arms decide.
Ne'er were the good and bad winnow'd so well,
And fever'd from each other. Such the liofts,
And such will be their fate, as when the rage
Of earth.born giants dar'd the sons of heav'n.

Agis. Thou reafon'ft like an anxious friend, L-

SANDER.
Thy fears are all for me, mine for my people.

Enter RHESUS.

Hail, gallant RHESUS ! know'lt thou ought of those

Thy countrymen, who thus unlook'd for come,
And in a doubtful hour perplex our councils?

Rhe. The Thracians are a thousand men corn-

pleat.

From snowy Hemus and the northern hills
Of wild Odryfus the fierce warriors come.
RHINALCES leads them, of illultrious birth;
But, tern, imperious, and grown old in arms,
He knows no umpire but tie sword, no law
Except obedience to the prince lie serves.

Agis. Such oft are those that quit a needy homo
To erve as hirelings in a tyrant's holt.

Rh. Next in command n)y brother Euxus ands,

A youth to MARS devoted ; for he loves
Danger itself, not danger's rich reward.

Lyj. Haft thou yet seen him ?
Rhe. No.
Lyf/ Has he yet heard
That thou art here in Sparta ?

Rhe. He believes

That I am still in Athens. From the herald
I kept my name and quality conceal'd;
For I fulpeded that these Thracian troops,
Though hir'd for Alia, were for Sparta meant.
If it prove so, I may be useful here:
My valiant brother bears a generous mind,
And, tho of arms enamour'd, jultice loves.

Agis.

.gis. Hafle to your valiant brother, and explain,

With an impartial tongue, the fate of Sparta,
Shew him where jultice, and where honour stand.
If there are sacred, as thou fay'lt they are,
To gallant Euxus he may prove a friend.

Lyfi Exert the (trong persuasion of a brother;

And tell him, RHESUS, if he loves bright arms,
And that immortal glory valour gains,
No more to wield a mercenary sword,
But plant himself with thee in Sparta's foil,
Where AGrs will his noble nature cherish,
And rear his courage to such lofty deeds,
As antient Itory tells of Sparta's chiefs.

[Exit RHESUS.
Agis. I hope that RHESUS will divide the Thra-

cians:

This favours well the bias of my mind,
Averse to leave the city on suspicion,
And drive the wavering faction to extremes.

Lyf O generous prince! whom I admire and blame.

The greatest foe, the foe LYSANDER dreads
Is the unequall'd gentleness of AGIS.
Review the story of the Grecian' Rates,
And mark how freedom fell in every land.
The brave asserters of the public cause
Have ever been too mild in evil times;
Have, like indulgent parents, spar'd the rod,
And let the vices of their children live
To kill the virtues. Hence, let AGIS learn
The only letfon that his nature needs.

Agir. Uncertain is the peril if I (fay,

But certain is the evil if I fly.
I will remain; but to assure my safety,
You mull, LYSANDER, to the troops return.

Lyf. And leave my prince alone ainid[t his foes!-

Revoke the hard command. If you're refolv'd
To brave the peril, then my place I claim
Next to your peroln; by your fide I Iand;

B 5 Perhaps

Perhaps ofme noble service I may render,
Receive the mortal wound aim'd at my prince,
And with my life redeem the life of AGIS.

.gis. Your great imagination's up in arms:

But hear me, and let calmer reason judge.
I am determin'd not to quit the city,
The guilt of civil war {hall not be mine.
LYSANDER'S presence here without the troops
Would but embolden and excite my foes,
Who may be tempted by this fair occasion,
This mighty vantage to furprize us both.
Without delay, once more, LYSANDER, arm,
And ofientatiouny pars thro' the gate.
This vitory, and the approaching host,
Will hu(h the threatned form.

Lyf. So may it prove.

But there is Something in my heart rebels
Against this counsel! Oh! I cannot leave you---
Nor ought I now to flay. Let never man
Say in the morning that the day's his own:
Things pad belong to memory alone;
Things future are the property of hope.
The narrow line, the ilthmus of these seas,
The initant scarce divisible, is all
That mortals have to tand on. 0 my prince!
LYSANDER leaves you with a heavy heart.

A.gis. Farewel, thou Spartan of the antient mould,
Dear as the brother of his blood to AGIS!

[They embrace and part.]
LYSANDER!

Lyf. Ha! may heaven your purpose change !
dgiJ. My will is six'd. But though my judgment

too

Confirms the secret counsel of my heart,
Yet I may be-decciv'd: perhaps, my friend,
We part this moment ne'er to meet again.

Lyf. Let us not part at all. 'Tis inspiration,

The guardian god, the demon of the mind,
Thus often prcllis on the human bread.

Gas.

Agis. Mistake me not, I feel no new impression,

Nor if I did, ihould I by that be alter'd;
For such prcfages be they fad or joyful,
I deem them but the meteors of the mind,
Bred by the inward elemental trife,
When great events perplex and lhake the oul.
My thoughts regard the R(ate. If I hould fall,
To thee, LYSANDER, I commit my ion,
The only pledge of my DEIDAMIA'S love.
Train up the boy to walk in the fame path
Which we have trod together, the firait path
Of virtue and true glory. If he proves
Of noble nature, and I hope no less,
He will not hun the lofty path of honour,
Tho' fate (hould mark it with his father's blood.

Lyf. Hear this, immortal Gods! who rule the

world,

And guard a prince the image of yourselves!
0 never, never may his royal race
LYSANDER'S aid require.

[Exit LYSANDER.

AGIS alon.

Affection choakes his words,

His generous heart burlts at this solemn parting.
In times like there of a declining (late,
Bafencfs insets the general race of men;
But yet there trying times rear up a few
More excellent, refin'd, and conscious spirits,
More principled, and fit for all events,
Than any in the good, but equal, mars
Of n far better age. Such is LYSANDE.
The hour draws near.

Enl:r

Enter SENATORS.

Sen. AfrembledSparta waits.
.gis. I come, my friends; I will address the peo.

ple,

Proclaim aloud mine actions which upbraid,
And Coon hall silence, my despiteful foes.
My heart Ihall speak. This sceptre of my fathers,
By long descent hereditary mine,
I would disdain to hold, did I not hope,
That by its sway I might recall those days
When Lacedamon was the pride of Greece,
The gaze and terror of the wondring world:
For there, as in a chosen temple, dwelt
Valour and virtue, whillt attending fame
And glory on the land of heroes hone.

Firit Sen. 0 Gods above! How happy were our

fires,
In those bright days of antient glory born.

.gis. Those days hall yet return, Olympian Jove!
Or low in dult Iball Spartan AGIS lie.

[tSund of musical InStrument.

Firfl Sen. What means this mufick?
Agis. To the Gods of Greece

And Sparta's guardian deities it founds.
Let us be gone, nor Itop the holy train.

[Exetiut.

Enter

Enter a Prcction.
AGESISTRATA, EUANTHE, Priess of JUPITER and

HERCU LS.

CHORUS of Matrons and Virgins.

Woes approach, till now unknown;
Discord hakes the Spartan throne.
Heav'n avert the ills we fear!
Jove, from high Olympus, hear!

Priests of JUPITER.

This day our foes embattled came,
And vow'd to end the Spartan name:
Embattled near our gates they fought;
But Jove for us deliverance wrought.
He smote Achaia's hold with fear,
He thunder'd in their trembling rear;
Jove's lightning flam'd from Sparta's spear.

CHORUS of Matrons and Virgins.

Ever may his mighty arm
Save the Spartan Itate from harm !

Ne'er

Ne'er may proud invader boast
Glory from our glory loft.
Light, 0 Jove, that sacred fire
Which did Sparta's sons inspire,
When the prince and people rove,
Burning with their country's love.
Xerxes, lord of great alarms.
Xerxes rous'd the world to arms.

Priests of JUPITER.

The earth was troubled at his hold,
The springs were dried, the rivers loft,
But Spartan valour check'd his pride,
A slender band his holt defy'd;
Thermopyla (immortal name!)
Beheld the Persian tyrant's (hame.

CHORUS of all.

There the brave three hundred dy'd,
Faithful by their prince's fide:
There they conquer'd, tho' they dy'd.

Priests of HERCULES.

On earth below, in Heav'n above,
Rever'd, victorious, son of Jove!
Hear, Alcides, hear our prayer,
Thy godlike offspring claims thy care.

C Ho ' S.

CHORUS of all.

Bend thy bow, Tyrimthius, bend,
Lightly on the earth descend.
Fix an arrow on the firing,
Stand beside the Spartan king,
AGIS of thy race divine,
Tried in labours like to thine.

Undaunted, like thee, with monsters he dtrives;
The fiercell of Hydras in faaion revives.

If he fall a sacrifice,
Never more shall Sparta rife!

[Exeunt.] As theproccfion goes cf.

Enter AMPHARES.

Thus may my pious foes for ever (trive;
Be theirs the airy aid of fabled Jove.
In nearer and more certain force I trust:
Of human race, I fight with mortal arms.
Yet prais'd be fortune, goddess of my vows,
'ris she whose happy hand leads forth these dames;
Ne'er to the palace /hall their Iteps return.
The net I've spread now covers all my foes,
Except LYSANDER. O had he been here!
Then I had (tood, like mighty Atlas, firm;
Fate bubrefcrves him to another day.

The

The time is almolt come : my Thracians now
Have reach'd their polts; and many a daring eye
Looks for the signal. Here it is-my sword.
When I appear thus arm'd, the furies rife;
This is the comet, the fierce blazing (tar,
On which commotion, change, and death attend.

[Exit AMPHARES.
End of the second Aa.

A CT

# ACT III. SCENE I.

ACT III. SCENE I.

Enter EUANTHE.
A THENIAN Pallas! 0 my native Gods!

Protec& your suppliant in a foreign land,
Where hall I fly? AGIs! O LYSANDER!

Enter SANDANE.

0 Queen ! a ranger thy protection claims,
Altho' thy lord, thy friends, are foes to mine,
Yet thou wilt sympathize with thy own sex,
And save me from the violence I fear.

Sand. Where is thy lover to defend thee now?

Where is the conquering valour of LySANDBR?
And virtuous AGIs? the reforming king
Whom thou waft wont to praise. Let me advise thee,
On brave AMPHARES try thy boaled charms;
So young, so fair a captive may ubdue
The vi&tor's heart.

Euan. Are these a woman's words ?
Sand. They are, and suited to a light adventurer,

Who left her parents, and her native land,
To seek a lover. Sure her roving mind,
True to its paflion, may the objec change,
And, pleas'd, accept AMPHARES for LYSANDER.

Euan. Thou fpeak'lt thy thoughts, and judgelt of

EUANTHE

By the deceitful standard of thy heart.
Too soon thou haft betray'd thy secret foul.
I am not yet a captive; I may live
To hew thee, Queen, that pity thou deny'lt me.
LYSANDER comes to rescue or revenge.

Sand.

Sand. LYSANDER soon hall be as AGIS is.

Thy wretched arrogance my foul contemns.
An enemy I have, the Spartan Queen,
Whose bitter tongue has often wrong'd my fame;
Her will I seek, and triumph o'er the ruin
Of her, and of her peace.

Euan. Had'st thou e'er felt

Sincere affetion, thou would'fr not insult me;
And had'lt thou ever known a mother's pains,
Thou could'lt not bear to grieve a mother's heart.

Sand. Minion, for this expet! thou pageant! thou

That dar'ft to brave, exasperate a Queen.
Thou halt repent thy pride, and kneel in vain.

(Exit SANDANE.

Euan. The anger that upported me is gone.
I feel my weakness, and her threatnings tear.-

Enter LYSANDER in a HELOT's garb.
HELOT, if pity, or if gold-

Lyf. EUANTHE !
Euan. 0 Heav'n and earth! LYSANDER !
Lyf. Yes, my love!

Thou fee'lt LYANDER, miserable man;
Does AGIS live?

Euan. AmidL the clash of arms,

And cries of fighting men, I heard them (hout
The name of AGIs. By-and-by a Spartan,
Flying and wounded, as he pass'd call'd out,
" The king is safe; the king has gain'd the temple."

Lyf. Then all is fae: for Sparta lives in him.
Euan. But the good Queen ?
Lyf. Her ex, her age protecs her.
Euan. Heaven grant they may: an impious band in

arms

Purfu'd the holy train. Fear gave me speed,
SorI outfiript them all. But now, LYSANDER,
Betray'd, encompafs'd, now what (fhll we do ?

Ly/:

Lyf. Wert thou but safely plac'd, LYSANDER knows

What he hould do. I mult not tarry here.
There is a temple in this spacious city,
For fanrity above all others famd,
To Juno sacred, the avenging Queen!
Thither a trusty lave of AGIS house
Will guide thy (teps: by my command he waits
Without the palace.

Euan. Whither dolt thou go?
Lyf. In this inglorious garb difguis'd, I wait

Till night and darknes come; then I attempt
The wall wheree'er I find it slightly guarded.
What mortal arm hall then oppose my way,
Urg'd as I am ? Alas, my lov'd EUANTHE!
From my compliance with thy fond requelt
Springs the worit evil of this dreadful hour.
I have betray'd the confidence of AGIS;
But I'll repair my fault.

Euan. What dolt thou mean ?
Lyf AGIS commanded me to leave the city,

And thinks, would to the Gods he thought aright!
That his LYSANDER heads the Spartan troops,
In whom his only hope of safety lies.
But I, EIUANTHE ! partial to thy will,
Sought thee in vain. In that unhappy time
They seiz'd the gates, and hut me up in Sparta,
Fate punithes with too revere a doom
Tne human weakness of indulgent love.
AGIS ! I come!-For the deep voices now
Of duty, friendlhip, gratitude, and glory,
Sound thro' my breast, and from my beating heart
Their echo rings. Farewell my love, farewel!

Euan. Not yet, LYSANDER ! AGIS is oppre(t,

And Sparta too. Does duty, or does honour,
Require LYSANDEFR, like an eastern slave,
To fall attendant on the royal pile ?
What can you do? The army will betray you:
So with the few, the faithful few that love you, Yo

' ' ~~~~~You'll

You'll do Come desperate ation, and be slain.
If you despise your life, yet think of me,
rie prey of curst AMPHARES.

Lyf. Infernal Gods!

Let me not think of that. Retire, EANTHE,
And in the hallow'd temple reft secure.
This night I'll force ill-guarded Sparta's gates,
And five my prince, my country, and EUANTHE.

Euan. Thy prince, thy country are already loft.

O lilten, and preserve thyself and me:
The (hip that bore m to the Spartan hore
Rides (till at anchor: leave this wretched land.
Wheree'er thou goelt I will attend thy [teps;
Thy gods Ihall be my gods; thy people, mine.

Lyf. Alas! EUANTHE does not fee the hame,

The ruin of that counsel love inspires.
Th' eternal gods repose this hour in me
No common trust: Upon my deeds depend
The fate of AcIs, and the fate of Sparta.
My soldiers too, my brave, my faithful oldiers,
The meanest warrior of the royal band
Freely devotes his life to godlike AGIS.
And ihall their leader, liall the friend of AGIS,
Forsake his prince? I will forget thy words;
Repeat them not.

Euan. Is this LY ANDER's love!

Mult I not speak? Is my reward reproach ?
For you I left my friends and native land,
I)efy'd all danger, and all censure fcorn'd
Now in my lore di(trefs I call on thee
For whom I susser, to protect my honour,
And in my fore diltiefs dolt thou upbraid me?
If ever maid, like c.cdulous EUANTHB,
Burfis all the bonds of nature for one man
Let her beware that he be not a Spartan
0 wretched maid! O Athens loft in vain !

[Ready to faint.
L)'. All ruling powers! why am I thus diltrcit?

Why

Why come calamities o thick upon me
EUANTHE, hear me; you (hall be obey'd.
I'll bear thee hence, and go with thee to Athens,
ReRlore thee to thy country and thy friends,
Of whom thou dolt complain I have bereft thee.
LYs ANDER will acquit himfelfto thee,
And to mankind

Euan. Delude me not. Alas!

Thy tongue speaks comfort; but thy voice, thy looks,
Wild and unsettled, drive me to despair:
For thou, methinks, art desperate, LYSANDER.
Those lips that quiver, and those eyes that roll
Like dragon's eyes, those are not igns of love!
Thou fay'ft that thou wilt bear me back to Athens;
Will that acquit thee, if thou leav'ft me there ?
Is that thy purpose !

Lyf. Yes. I'll leave the world,

And death hall wipe dilhonour from my name;
AGIS and Sparta (hall forgive me then,
And every debt be paid.

Ean. LYSANDER, no.

Love's vitims are not of your terner sex,
It is the deltiny of womankind
Conltant to live, and desolate to die.
To Itrong necellity EUANTHE yields.
If I hould tear you from the fide of AGIS,
I fee my fate; you ne'er would love me more:
Tho' you hould live, yet you would die to me.
But will rather tay and perish here
Than live without thee. Go, and fight for AGIS;
But in the hour of danger think of me !
Calm in the rear direc the course of battle,
The dreadful van let other warriors lead,
In whom nor AGis nor EUANTIIE lives.

Lyf. These words become my idoliz'd EUANTHE!

And honour now approves the voice of love.
O thou firi objec of my young desires,

And

And thro' each period of my ripening years
Still more maturely and intensely lov'd.
Hear and believe my words.-Beware-,Beware.

Enter AMPHARES. [To his people.]

'Tis he, by Venus ! halt. Fear not, my fair,
Nor meditate escape from your AMPHARES.

Esan. My AMPHARES!
Amph. Thine, and thine alone!

Thou low'ring slave, begone! Hate ! urge me not
To tain my Iword with thy ignoble blood.

Exit LYSANDER.

Euan. Is this thy love ! Imperious, and in arms,

Recent from blood and treason, dolt thou come
To take by force and violence my heart ?

Amph. The love of thee, more powerful than ambition,

Inflam'd me to attempt the Spartan throne.
Thy beauty is the torch that lights the war:
For thee I conquer-Smile not thus in scorn,
Deign to accept my hand and Sparta's crown.

Euan. Dolt thou bellow the diadem of Sparta?
Where is thy lawful prince ?

Azmph. LEONIDAS ?
Euan. As.
Amph. That AGIS is no more a king;

A suppliant, surrounded by my troops,
In Juno's temple with the priests he dwells.
LEONIDAS, by me reltor'd to power,
Will gladly (hare with me divided empire.
Or, if I please to reign alone, I may.
Thro' dark conspiracy and open (irife,
For thee I trove; thou wilt reward my love.
Beauty, like thine, pertains not to the vanquifh'd,
But still triumphant reigns the vi&or's queen.

Euan. Think'lt thou there isno truth in human breasts,

No faithful loyalty, no conRtant love ?
Soon (halt thou learn thine error. I begin
To teach thee firit. lice and thy love I (corn !

And

And may the gods reward thy base ambition
As I reward thy love.

Amph. 0 womankind!

How well your paflions teach us to be just!
You love LYSANDER still; a little time
Will from your mind erase the memory
Of that vain.glorious, loft and ruin'd man,
Who was my rival.

Euan. Was! whate'er he was

He is, and more. Thou and thy crimes contribute
To make him more illustrious, more belov'd,
Thou giv'ft him cope and vantage to his virtue.
Speak'lt thou of crowns whillt royal AGis reigns
Of power in Sparta whilf LYSANDER lives ?
The Ihort dominion of this day is thine,
But vengeance and LYSANDER come to.morrow.

4mph. Thou do'st inltruEt me. If my time is fiort

We hould not part. I'll fee thee safely plac'd
Where I command.

Euan. will not go with thee.
A4mph. Yield to neceflity; for on my call

Compulsion waits. No other hand than mine
Should touch EUANTHI.

[Seizes her hand.

Euan. Help, Spartans! help!
If any hear me who regard LYSANDER.

Enter LYSANDER with a dagger, and

runs at AMPHARES who retires.

Amph. Afllft me, friends. Surround him-'Tis LY-
SANDER.
Take him alive.

[To is people who enter.)
Lyf. No. That they cannot, traitor!

[Snatche a word from one of the Soldiers.
Now I am better arm d.

.amph. Kill him, Euxus,
Unless he yield his sword.

Lyf. Come brave AMPHARES!
Come to the front, and there dire&t my fate.

Amph.

,mph. Kill him!
Euan. That would dishonour me forever.
Advance on all fides, and close in upon him.

Lyf. Strangers, give way, and let the Spartan

chiefs

Fight their own quarrels. I will give you all
The wealth of Sparta.

/.mph. Ha! he grows upon them !
Throw down your weapons, or I'll pierce her heart!

[Points his /word to EUANTHE'S breafl.

Eux. Renown'd LYSANDER! give thy sword to
Euxus.

Euan. Defend thy noble life! Regard not mine.

[AMPHARES ifts his arm.

Lyf. Hold, hold.
.4mph. Thou know's me.-Choofe.
Lyf. I cannot bear to fee Eu ANTHE die!

rtrows down his fiord.
OAGIs! O my prince !

.tmph. ViCtorious chief,

Statefiman and soldier, learned Athens' boat,
Where are thy glories now?

Lyf. The trife of tongues
I. Ihun as thou didft hun the firife of arms.

.mtph. Yet let thy haughtiness grant one requelt.

Tell me what brought the great LYSANDE R hither?
Some firatagem profound; which none but he
Could have contriv'd to haflen his deltruftion,
And add disgrace and ridicule to ruin.

Lyf. Hadlt thou not fled, thou coward, from my

sword,

And hriek'd for help, this arm, this ingle arm,
Had baffled all the craft of false AlMPARS.

.mph. This pride becomes thee, and thy loft con-

dition.

Lyf In this condition it becomes me belt

To brave AMPHARES. Had he been a captive
I hould have pitied him.

^Smslj.

,dmph. Plead's thou for pity?
Ly/. For none that thou can t give. Hear me, their

judge,

If what I speak is meant to win thy favour,
I (hould have pitied thee by fate subdued:
Oppreft with crimes, thy spirit would have shrunk
Under calamity, and guilt have marr'd
The noble vigour and the port of manhood.
Amidit thy triumph, does it not confound thee,
To think thou ow'lt it to exces of baseness
Thou halt prevaild, because the generous Agis
Would not believe there could be such a traitor.

4,mph. Oft have I heard, and often seen thy folly,

But now to rail is madness. With one word
I could impose on thee eternal silence.

Lyf. And would-I know thee-if thou thouglit'L

it wire.

Even then, as now, I (hould contemn thy power:
But know, I fear thee not. The king is lase,
And his victorious troops at break of day
Will thunder in thine ears: thou and thy band
Will ill fultain the Ihock of such an holt.
My life is in thy hands, but yet beware,
Thy fate depends on mine. In LacedAmon;
A prince like Agis soon will find Lysanders.

Anmph. Uncertain thy predictions of the future:

Small is thy prescience, witness thy condition.
Euxus, conduct him to yon corner tower.

Euan. L)fander!
Lyf. O ! I have withdrawn mine eyes
From thee, and to contention turn'd my heart.

Euan. Yet look on me before we part for ever.
Lyf. At looks or words of tenderness, he'll finile,

And o'er the sorrows of our love rejoice:
Forgive me till, I mutt not, cannot fpcak.

Euan. But I will speak, and earth and heaven (hall

hear me.

Amphares too (hall hear ; for it will gaul him,
To hear E.uanthe now avow hler love
And faith to her Lyfimdler. Powerful words,
Emblems and figures of tirm conitancy,

C C l1.:t

Such as fond lovers lavishly employ
To sooth the pangs of parting and of absence.
Such music vows accord not with our (tate,
Our dreadful Rate: yet do not grieve thy heart,
Thy noble heart, too full of other sorrows,
With thoughts of what may happen to Euanthe.
Nothing {hall happen to debase Euanthe.
The bondage and the shame that women susser,
Who live the slave of those who flew their lords,
I ne'er (hall know, I never will endure.
If cruel defliny decrees thy fall,
Unspotted to the hades I'll follow thee,
For whom alone on earth I'd wish to live.

Lyf. Lead on. Farewel, Evanlhe.
Euan. Gods above!
dmph. Condut -her to the tower where late.you

lodg'd
The captive Queen.

Euan. Alas! no guarded tower,

Or vaulted dungeon, ever yet contain'd
Two more unhappy, or more helpless captives!

[Exeunt guarded.

Ampl. LfanJer's fierce demeanour and his threats,

Proud as he is, spring not from pride alone;
1 mull Itretch forth my Arms to helter'd Agis.
If I accomplish not.this night his ruin,
To.morrow's rising fun may fee my fall.
Curit be the temples! curit the priests of Sparta!
Now I am like a man who has *dventur'd
To cruss the flats forsaken by the main,
And looking back fees not the shore he left;
Thro' deeps and hallows, rocks, and quaking sands
On he mull go. To (top is sure perdition.

Enter Sandane.
Hail to the queen of Sparta.

Sand. Yes, Ampharesi

Now fortune seens to smile upon Sandane.
T aw the fullen captive led along,'
His gloomy eye-balls six'd upon the earth.

,mnpT/. This night, 0 queen ! must fee the bold

conclusion.

Of

of a design, thus far so bravely borne.
On hollow and deceitful ground we treads
Whilst .4gs lives.

Sand. Thou speak' i my very thoughts.

Seaoons there are, .Ampharei, which suspend
All fan&imonious reverence and refpet.

Amph. Temples, and priests, and altars hall not

save him,

If fate Ihould drive us to the las extreme.
Meanwhile, I will employ more gentle means
To gain our ends: For sacrilege would rouse
The zealous multitude to rage and arms.
The temple is begirt with Thracian bands,
Who all access forbid; and 4gis knows not
What has befallen Lysander. I will fend
A subtle Spartan in Lysander's name,
Who may by specious arguments perruade him
To quit the fan&uary; and then, O queen!
With all solemnity of pomp and form,
Th' assembled Ephori Ihall pass his doom,
And in the fame decree include Lysander.

Sand. Think'fR thou the Ephori will give the fanion
Of their authority to Agis' death?

.Amph. They will. At midnight the lern judges

meet

In Terror's temple; they have charg'd a herald
With orders to the troops not to advance
On pain of treason. The aftonih'd people
Will crouch and tremble at that awful power,
Which draws the sword of jultice on a king.
Then shall your lord's authority revive;
And like the fun, when burlting from a cloud,
With greater power and brighter splendor shine.

[Exeunt.
C 2 ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Lysander as a Prifitcr, the Thraciaa Guards a

difance.

Lyrander musing, advances and/peaks.
H AS virtue no prerogative on earth!

And can the Gods permit the fall:of Agis;

They can. 'Tis man's own arrogance arrays him
In gorgeous titles of excelling nature,
Care of the Gods, and centre of creation.
1 fear, I fear man's life is but a dream;
His foul a subtle efflnce of the blood,
A rainbow beauty, made to hine a space,
Then melt and vanish into air.
Ye mighty minds of fages and of heroes!
Epaminondas, Plato, great Lycurgus!
Who once with such transcendent glory Ihone,
Brighter than all the (tars that deck the heaveis,
Is your celestial fire for ever:quench'd,
And nought but a(hes left, the port of chance,
Which veering winds Itill blow about the world ?
I will not think so! Yet, alas! the while
I fee and feel presages that alarm,
If they prove true. If man is like the leaf,
Which falling from the tree revives no more,
I hall be hortly dust. That will not hear
Euanthe weep, nor fee the Ihame of Sparta!
Now I'm a living man, my mind is free,
And, whillt I live and breathe, by heaven I'll a&
As if I were immortal.

,Enter Rhesus and Euxus.
Rhesus. See where he Itands! behold him!-0 my

brother!

The bravest and the best of human kind.-
Oppreft with grief and hame, and fatal love,
Indignant virtue but augments his pain.
Will not my EuxuJ give his aid to heave

This

This noble vessel from the rock'it beats on?

[Goles up to Lysander.
My lord! my leader! Oh!

Lv/ My faithful Rhesus !

Com'ft thou to hare the ruin that Lysander
Has brought upon himself, his prince, his country?

Rhef. I come more eager and more proud to Ihare

Thy present fortune, than thy former glory.
Alas, my lord! 'twould make a stranger weep,
To fee the chief, whom conquest crown'd to day,
A captive.

Lyf. Rhefuis, thou haft nam'd the least

Of my calamities. I could endure
With Spartan fortitude, my own difalters;
Bear to be hurled from meridian glory,
And, like a falling tar, be seen no more.
But oh! the king!-and desolate Euanthe !-

Rhef. Do not despair.
Lyf. Thou art my only hope.

This day thy generous brother fav'd my life;
At his request I yielded up my sword,
EIfe had Lysander like a soldier fall'n.
Thou art my friend in noble perils prov'd.
My fate, the fate of Sparta, and of .dgis,
Is in the Hands of Euxus

Rhef. Ah! my brother!
Euxus. 0 chief of Sparta! Euxus is diftreft

On every fide. Thy virtue, thy misfortunes
Have touch'd my heart: but here in trust I Itand.
Would I had never seen the walls of Sparta!

Lyf. The Gods, the guardian Gods of Lacedaemon,

Have brought you hither to preserve a people,
And save from traitors' hands the belt of kings.
Altho' at firit you rashly drew the sword
In blind obedience to a leader's will,
The gallant Euxus will not sure perfilt
In error known, in manifelt injustice.
Thy trade is war, brave soldier; this is not
An office for thy sword.

EuxuJ. True are thy words.
I was indeed deceiv'd, and came not here

C 3 To

To mix in Sparta's ftiife; but honour now-

Rhe. I will not hear thee plead so bad a cause.

Is there a bond in nature like the tie
Which binds the hearts of brothers! And will Euxss,
From vain ideas of fidelity
To that detested traitor, false Amphares,
His brother murder ?

Eux. No.
Rhe. Then let thy arms

Defend Lysander. By ourcountry'sGods
I swear, and by our warlike father's foul,
Whose well-beloved son thou ever wert,
That with the Spartan chief thy brother dies.

Lyf. Might you not favour the escape of gis P
The guards are Thracians.

Eux. I might favour thine,
My power extends not to the guards of AgiJ.

Rhef. And wilt thou not ?
Eux. Command thyself, my brother.
Rhefi How canit thou hesitate ?
Eux. I must beware,

Inferior in command to bold Rhinalces,
And ever view'd by him with jealous eyer.
Whilf I deliberate no time is loft.
The light of day fiits not with your designs;
Before the night comes on I will determine.

Lyf 'Tis almolt night, the fun hath left the heavens,

And doubtful twilight uhers in the gloom.
Perhaps the enemies of digiJ wait
The darkness of the night to cover deeds
They dare not at by day. This night I dread-

Rhef, The Ephori have ent a herald forth,

Charg'd with ome solemn menace, and command
To fRop the army's march.

Lyf. If they obey,

The fane of Juno guards the king no more !
Eternal Gods! how wretched is Lyjander !
From me that herald hould have heard his answer.
Cannot my Rhefu find one gallant Spartan
To bear my orders to the royal band
To form the city ?

no la

Rhe I myself will bear
These orders to the camp.

Lyf. Another talk,

More difficult and dangerous is thine.
Aflume the arms and velture of thy country,
And thro' the Thracians win thy way to gis.
Rhesus, the generous spirit of that prince
Is of a nature that excludes all fear,
Consideration, and refpec of Self:
On earth he ads as if be were a God,
Immortal, and incapable of harm.
Think how the artful falsehood of Amphares
May operate on such a royal mind.

Enter a Thracian.

Thrac. The Spartan lord draws near.
Euxus. Amphares comes.

Retire, my lord, whilst I advance to meet him
Our intercourse might lead him to suspicion.

Lyf. Nor vigilance nor care I recommend

To thee, my Rhefis ! But let caution rule
Thy forward zeal.

Rhef. It shall, my noble lord:

My heart beats high with hope to fee thee rife
Once more, like Mars, in arms.

Lyf. Eternal Gods!
In Thracihn brealts the Spartan virtue lives.

[Lysander enters into the tower.

[Exit Rhesus.

M/lanet Euxus.
Enter Amphares.
How does the haughty captive brook confinement?

Euxus. Full of inquietude he seems, and fadnels.

Now in some pensive polture fits a-while,
Then snites his breast, and, tarting from his feat,
Walks to and fro with a diforder'd pace.

A.mph. Admit no Spartan of whatever sex,
Or whatfoe'cr affinity they claim.

Euxus. That (trit command hath been already given.
^'ph. ''is needful, Euxus; for his furious mind,

In this extreme, will snatch at night occasions
To make incredible and wild attempts.

C 4 Renew

Renew the charge; then go and cfarch Lyfandtr
For secret weapons. On his breast he wears
A curious gorget, rich with precious (tones,
And a small portrait of furprizing beauty,
The image of the fair Athenian maid,
Drawn by an artist who has vy'd with nature
In sweet expreflion of her matchless charms:
That I must have.

Eux. You hall without delay.

CExit Euxus.

Manet Amphares.

Let other men deprive themselves of pleasure,
And toil for bare ambition: I'll provide
A more luxurious banquet to my taste.
What tho' as yet Euantke loves me not,
It is the natpre of her sex to change.
With wondrous ease the female kind submit
To destiny; and soon are reconcil'd
To persons and conditions once abhorr'd.
Like birds new caught, who flutter for a time,
And itruggle with captivity in vain;
But by-and-by they reft; they smooth their plumes,
And to new malters ling their tbrmer notes.
This facile temper of the beauteous fCx
Great Agamemnon, brave Pelides, prov'd:
They sack'd the cities, and they flew the fires,
The brothers, and the lovers of the fair,
Who wept a while, then wip'd their watry eyes,
And loft their sorrows in the hero's arms.

Enter Sandane.

The herald is return'd. The royal band,
Inflam'd with rage and scorn, the mandate tore;
And to the city bend their rapid march.

dmph. Let them advance. They haften to their fate.

A secret tratagem I have devis'd
To check these warriors in their bold career.

Sand. The Ephori in resolution faint-
Amph. Their courage I'll reltore; for Agis yields

To the fallacious counlellor I sent.
Democharec, in sacerdotal robes,
As if difguis'd t' elude the Thracian guards, P

Pa[t

Pall in by my permiflion, and conjur'd
Agis to quit the fane's uncertain shelter,
And seek the Cure protection of the camp:
Himself he offer'd as his faithful guide.
This in L yfander's name. gis at first,
Irresolute and doubtful, balanc'd much:
At lalt this thought sprung up, and turn'd the scale:
That his escape would force us to submission,
And end the Itrife without the hock of arnas.
Demochares at midnight is appointed
To come again; and goes with an addition
That will give certain credence to his words:
The gorget of Lysander.

Sand. Now dmpharet,

I fee the snares of death are wrapt around him;
Our hated foe (tands on the verge of fate:
He who defpis'd Sandane, and permitted,
With molt insulting courtesy, my Itay;
I would not have remain'd one day in Sparta,
But for the hope I had to work his ruin.
He is the root, with him the branches fall.

Amnph. Altho his son is safe in Orchomenos,.

Yet there in hopeless exile he mufl live.
But Agefiflrata--

Sand. Shall not survive

To travel suppliant thro' the Rates of Greece,
And Ihew her hoary hairs with alhes tfrew'd,
To move compassion in the giddy Greeks.
She's old, and fit to die.

Enter a Spartan neflcngEer.

The Thracian troops
Who guard the temple, faithful to their charge,
Have leiz'd a spy; who, cloatl'd and arm'd like them,
Attempted to pass thro' their ranks to ,gis.
Rhinalces for a while delay'd the doom
That martial law decrees, till you yourself
Difcourlf and judge the captive.

Ami/'h. I approve
'I'le vigilatce and condu of Rhinalcer.

[Exit vMelfnger.
Sanu. Still flows the tide of fortune; I'll dispatch

C 5 Oront, I

Orontes to my lord. Joyful he comes
To re-aflume his sceptre and his throne.
Farewel, restraint, and laws that bind a prince.
The people's majelty, the senate's power,
Shall shrink beneath their awful monarch's sword:
Fear is the only principle of rule,
Which man, like other animals, obeys. [Exit Sandane.

Manet Amphares.
Why tarries Euxus now ?

Enter Euxus.

I mufl applaud
Thy countrymen for discipline and care,
As well as valour; they have seiz'd a spy,
Who mix'd with them, difguis'd in Thracian arms.

Eux. In Thracian arms!
Anrph. Yes, to pass to Agis.

Some bold adventurer of the royal band,
Whose life-Why art thou troubled ? Has Lysander
Efcap'd the guards ?

Eux. No. I am pale with anger,

At the reproachful terms, the bitter taunts,
Which I have fuffer'd from incens'd LyJander,
In execution of thy late commands.

[Gives the Gorget.

Afmph. Is that the cause ?
He loon Ihall be no objet of thy wrath.

[Exit Amphares.

Mlanet Euxus.

FMy brother feiz'J ! I hesitate no more.
The voice of nature in my brcalt exclaims
Against the rigour of thoe guilty laws,
Which bind a Ibldier blindly to obey.
Son of my mother ! brother of my blood!
I fly to save thee.-Now I'm thine, Lffander.

[Gcei to the gte of the Tower.
Chief of Sparta !

Enler Lyfilder.
Is Euxul yet refolv'd ?

Eux. That thou flalt fee, thy enemies arc mine.
Rhesus is taken.

L)s' My contagious fate
InfeLcs my friends! my brave, my generous Rhefils

Eux.

Eux. Friend of my brother ! irft I set thee free.

An officer of mine commands that gate
At which the Thracians enter'd ; hatte thee thither,
Array'd like one of those whom I will fend
To guide thy Iteps.

Lyf Ye guardian Gods of Greece !

Whose ways my(terious fondly I arraign'd,
Forgive my rashness ! Prosper now my sword--
Where are my arms
[IVhilfl Lysander Jeaks Euxus beckcns one cf hisfldiers.

Eux. Here enter, and obey
Without reply.

[Exeunt Lysander and the Threcian to the Tower.

The soldiers hearts are mine:
Their various toils and perils I have flar'd,
And more than shar'd, the firfi in hard extremes,
When signal danger claims a leader's sword.
No spoil, no treasure, have I e'er referv'd;
The wealth I covet is the soldier's love.
My bold Odryfians are a faithful band:
In this diltrefs l'il throw n)yelf on them, , ,
They will support me. \ '.

Enter a Spartan Messenger. '

AlejT. Leader of Thracian bands!

Amphares and the magiltrates of Sparta,
Met in the Snate-houfe expect thy prefencc.

Eux. I will attend them. [Exit n:.erel r.

Surely they have learned,
Th t I am bother to ill-fated RleJfus.

Enter Lysander in Thracian drefj and arms.

L)/. Once more at liberty ! Once more in arns
To rhec, brave Thracian

Eux. I am fumnmon'd hence

To meet the phori. I fear, my lord,
Tlhey have difcover'd Rheits is my brother.

Ly/ That (fcret in your brea31 and his is lodg'd

Nor can his ahct'd lfeatures now betray hin.
In early yottl he left his native land;
'I'le leat of uinnmer, and tie winter's cold,
,n iany n hard campaig;n, 1have cias'ld Ili bloom.

'ErX, lnalccd, I incw him nt.

r .,/

Lyf. Then who could know him?

Calm and determin'd to the senate go:
Here 111 remain, and wait your quick return.
To know what they design imports us much.

Eux. Your (tay is full of danger; rilk it not.
Lyf. All necessary dangers mutt be rifk'd.

Perhaps I am the fubje& of their councils,
Perhaps I may be call'd before the senate.
If I appear not, you mutt be difcover'd,
And my escape too soon to them be known.

Eux. Your reasons are of force. I am convinc'd.

Here, take my sword. Then, if we are betray'd,
My troops obey you. Now, my bold Sithonter.

[To cwe of hi .Thracians.

Draw your battalion nearer to the square,
And guard the person of this Spartan chief,
As you would guard myself. If I'm detain'd,
Follow to death or vi&tory, Lysander.

[Exit Euxus.

Lyf: Shall I obey the impulse of my heart,

And lead there Thracians to the tower that holds
My loft Euante P No, let reason rule.
Amphares will not, dares not, wrong her honour,
Whilst undecided is the fate of Agis.
'Tis night, but never hall the morning rife
On-Who can know the secret will of heaven!
Tell me, ye inextinguishable ires,
That light the counsels of eternal Jove,
Have you, since Time began his long career,
Beheld a mortal like L)fander tof ?
Down, down, enthusiasm! my heart be calm!
A little while, and thou halt beat no more.
Oft have I wilht for perilous occasions;
And, wandrfng in the academic grove,
Have rous'd myself with (Irong imagination
Of great exploits by ardent valour done:
But ne'er did fancy's tempest match the truth,
The trong reality of such a Itorm.
0 did I combat but for life alone,
Werc Sparta and Euanthe afe fpedators
How gaily flould Lyli Idcr take the field.

E lxu$

# ACT V. SCENE. I.

Euxus draws near-Upon the infect wing
Of a small moment ride th' eternal fates.

Enter Euxus.

My fears were vain. The secret is unknown.
But Rhesus is condem'd to die to-morrow.

Lyf. To morrow! Ere to-morrow men shall die
Who are not yet condemn'd.

Eux. 'ris true by heaven!

Mortal designs and enterprizes rife
On every fide. The Ephori resolve
At midnight to furprize the royal band,
And order'd me to hold my troops prepar'd
Their forces to fultain.

I.yf. 'Tis well! 'tis wondrous well!

They urge me now, and point the line of adtion.
Under the high up.lifted arm of fate
I'll rush, and Itrike before their blow can fall.
I'll Itorm the city while they force the camp.
Your troops--

Eux. Shall join you at the gate. The word?
Lyf Agis. Farewell Now I hall save thee, Agis,
Or leave my blood upon the (tones of Sparta.

[Exeunt Lysander and Euxus.

ACT V. SCENE. I.
Amphares and tie Ephori with the Officers, &c. 7hk

gate of the prijon f/en at a dillance.

Firit Ephori.
T HE hour is pail

Second Ephori.
I fear-

,4mfph. Silence. He comes.
I hear the (leps of wnry treading feet.

Enter a Spartan, Agisfollowins.

git. This way conduts not to Anmcla's gate.
Ha! whither dolt thou lead me?

A4mh. To thy death. The

The Ephori of Sparta have condemn'd thee.

Agi. I am betray'd! What mockery is this

Of sacred jultice ? Lay aside the robes
And ensigns of authority prophan'd:
The pomp of magistracy suits not treason.

Amph. The licence of thy tongue affronts the laws,
Whose awful reverence our office guards.

Agis. Know ye not this, ye guardians of the laws,

The meanelt citizen of Lacedsmon
Without free tryal cannot be condemn'd;
Much less your king. What law have I tranfgrefs'd?
Point out my crime; produce my bold accusers.

.mph. Thy crime is tyranny.
.gis. Is that my crime?

Had Agis been a tyrant, thou had't been
His fawning slave, thou enemy of freedom.

4Atph. Behold this flubborn spirit of this man:

He breathes his native arrogance, and till
Insults his judges, and avows his crimes.

Agis. Who made you judges of the life of gis ?

But you have judg'd: yourselves, and earth, and heaven
Know how unjutly.. To the gods above,
The sure avengers of a nurder'd king,
I make my last appeal. Their meflenger
Is on the wing; Lfander comes apace;
And Nemesis directs his righteous sword.

.mph. Proceeds this boldness from thy trust in him '

Thy great avenger is, like thee, a captive,
And under the lame mortal sentence lies.

Ais. Ye powers above! Lfander ! too a captive!
Where was he taken ?

Amph. In the ltreets of Sparta,
Clad in the servile garment of a Helot.

/Agis. Alas! alas! Lfan:Jer! 0 my f iend i

Thy love for me, thy generous, fearless love,
Has wrought thy fall. For me thou cn'lt to Sparta
And, like the parent bird hov'ring too near
Its captive young, thy noble life is loll!-
Forgive thefle tears, my country! h'gis weeps
For thee. Alas! thy brave defender's gone!
0 Laccdxnion, thou art fallen for ever

Thy

Thy bad estate hall every day grow worse;
Succefllive tyrants hall exhault thy strength,
Till all thy generous youths have bled in vain;
At lalt the consummation of thy woes
Shall come upon thee; rome ambitious foe
Shall firetch the iron arm of conquefi forth,
And grasp thee in the circle of his empire.
My native land, the kingdom of my fathers,
Shall be no more a nation! 0 my country,
How irretrievable is thy condition!
The Macedonian vulture hovers o'er thee,
Soon to descend, and on thy vitals prey.

Amph. Thout may'lt delay, perhaps avoid, thy death,

Send forth thy mandate to the royal band,
To halt till further orders.

Agis. Ha! No more

I trutt thee, traitor. Would I had ever been
Thus deaf to thee 1 No, let the royal band
Revenge their gallant leader and their king.

First Ephori.
Thou tempt'it thy fate.

Agis. I scorn it. Since my hope

Of parta's loft, and my beloved friend
Has perith'd in my cause, why fllould I live'
In any period of my former days
I rather would have choose to die attempting
The glorious design, which you have ruin'd,
Than live the prince of a degenerate people,
The tame fpcator of a falling empire.

FirJf Ephori.
To reason hearken.

Agis. Reason bids me die,

As I liave liv'd unalter'd in my love
To Sparta, and unconquer'd in my purpose.
You mean to take advantage of my Itate,
Without pectator, counfcllor, or friend:
You think I dread the Item approach of death,
Bccaue the blooming Ical'in of my life
Still pronmiles a long extent of years:
But lly lorfc(aliirs blood is in my veins,
The blood of herocs, and of partan kings.

Less

Lers only than the Gods. I dare your worlt,
And with my dying breath acquit my people.
The people rose; they hearken'd to the voice
Of Liberty, and blert the name of Agis.
But you, the nobles, an inglorious race,
Base as the dastard and unarmed Helots,
With foreign arms and mercenary aid,
Bore down the people, and oppreft your prince,
Whom death delivers. gis (hall not fee
The lalt convulsions of expiring Freedom.
For in the firIt he dies.

Amph. We'll hear no more

Of there invectives. Bear him to the place
Of execution. Officers, advance
And do your duty.

Officers.
This is not our duty.

Amph. What!
Ofi. Murder of a king is not our duty.
dimph. Mutinous slaves! for you I'll find a time.
Sir. [7o Agis.]

,gis. Touch me not, for uncompell'd I go
To meet my destiny. Weep not for me,

[To an Officer.

O! thou whose nature suits not thy employmient,
Weep not for me! I would not change conditions
With these bad men. I hall not feel the woes
That thou and all must feel, the woes of Sparta!
O! might my death avail my much.lov'd country,
I'd die as joyful then, as fearless now.

[Exit Agis guarded.

Amph. Atone your insolence by prompt obedience,
Or death's your portion. [To an Offier.

[Exeunt with Agis.

Ilanet Amphares,. &c.

Amph. Magifrates of Sparta!

This piinful work of neceflfry justice
Will quickly end the troubles of the (ate.
Lecnidas, who owes his crown to you,
Your faithful zeal and service will reward.

I[Exrtunt Eplori

Manet

Manet Amphares and the Spartan who enter'd with Agis.

Amph. Haste to the Thracian captain, and require him

To fend his prisoner Lysander hither. [Exit Spartan.
Agis remov'd, and turbulent Lysander,
Like snow along the Ihore, their army melts.

Enter MlefJnger from the dungeon.

Me'f. The executioners refuse their office:

Sacred they hold the person of a king,
A Spartan king descended from the Gods.

Amph. Again those fables of the villain priests

Rife up to thwart me. Now, my trulty servant,
Approve thy faith, and win my lasting favour.
Each instant of delay is big with peril
Whillt Agis lives. Let thy good sword fulfil
The sentence of the law, and thy own tongue
Shall name the recompense.

Mess. Shall it, my lord?

I am your inRrument, and bind myself
By this bold deed ill falter to your fortunes. [Exit.

Amph. Ye sons of bold ambition, learn of me:

Trust not the survey of another's eye:'
Yonr dangerous voyage needs a pilot's care
Who never quits the helm.

Enter Spartan.

Spar. We are betray'd.
Lysander -

Amph. What of him? Speak-faulter not.
Spar. Is fled.
Amph. Whither? With whom?-Eternal Gods!
Spar. The guards have set him free, the open gates
I saw, and ent'ring fearch'd the empty tower.

Amph. That traitor Euxur! Now let me resolve
And quickly too.

Spar. The people are alarm'd,
And gather to their tribes.

Amph. Curit be their tribes.

The deed is done already. Yet I have
One pledge of value.

Spar. Ageiltrata.-
Apmph. This hour he dies. I've ent a trusty ave
To end her woes. But the Athenian maid,

Her

Her I'll bear off in spite of frowning fortune.
Go to the turret, and condud her hither.

[Exit Spartan.

Manet Amphares.

Malignant powers! or blind unerring fate,
This is your work: now you aflert your empire.

Enter Meflenger.

My lord, the troops of Euxus, have revolted.
Rhinalces visited this night each post,
And near Amycla's gate omen Thracians met,
Whose leader, queftion'd, anfwer'd with his sword.

Amph. By heaven and earth, Lysander -Ha ! pro.

ceed.

Mef. The sudden onset, and the cloud of night

The traitors favour'd; rome efcap'd our swords,
But many more in the harp combat fell.

Amph. Did their fierce leader fall
Mess Above the re(t

Conspicuous he fought; at him each sword
Was pointed. If he fell not on the spot,
Sure he received wounds that mull fatal prove.

tAmph. Confirm me that, and I will mock at fate.

Command my troops, that in the Forum watch,
Tojoin Rhinalces. I mvyelf will follow.

[Exit Mefrlnger.

Enter Euanthe.

How beautiful (he is! Should he survive,
Thofc charms divine he never (hall enjoy.

Euan. Why hall thou call'd me hither to afflit
And torture me with spectacles of woe ?

LThe Gate of the Pri/on opens, and

Amphares's Slave advances.

Eternal powers! Why yawn yon dreadful gates?
And from what horrid deed Italks yonder villain?

Mef. Thy orders are obey'd. He lives no more.
Eur.. Barbarian monser! halt thou kill'd LyfaJmder?-

But I will not reproach thee, nor complain
To the regardless Gods. My doom is palt;
There is one only refuge for Euanthe.
Once more I follow where Lysander leads,
Where murder and AmIhares cannot come,

To

To part us more.

[She runs towards the dungeon,

Amphares/eizes her.

SAmph. Some other season choose,

There is no leisure now for lamentation.
Forthwith conduct her to th' Arcadian gate
There with the horsemen wait.

Enter Messenger.

Megs. My lord, my lord,
The royal band by Thracian Euxus led -

(Shout.)

Anmph. My enemy prevails- This way with me.
My steps pursue, or by the gods of Hell!-

Euan. I will not leave this place. Draw forth thy

sword,
And try if death can terrify despair.

Amph. Drag her along. (Shout.)

Again !- the foe draws near.

(Shout from the other fide,

Agis and Liberty.)
Amph. I am encompaft; yet I'll mar their triumph.

(Runr at Euanthe with ki /sword.

Enter Lyfanderfollow'd by Rhelus.

Infernal dog, turn and behold Lysander.
Fly, Rels, to the king. lTraitor accurlt! (Exit Rhefts.
Down, down, to Tartarus; there, villain, howl.

(Amphares falls.

Euan. Amazing powers alive ! victorious ! Oh!
Lyf. And have I come to save thee, O Euanthe!

Rut oh ! I fear, I come too late for Agis.
The dungeon mouth is open.

Enter Rhesus.

Tell me, Rhefits.

Rhef. The king is murder'd, in yon vault lie lies,
Lyf My prince! my friend ! thy goodness, and thy

virtue,

Thy clemency, thy mildness, have undone thee!
Fatal to nations is the dread example!
Hence monarchs, who with iron sceptre rule,
Will justify their treatment of mankind;
And virtuous princes, born in evil times,
Will heitate to Iem corruption's tide. Left

Left they (hould be like Agis overwhelm'd.

.amph. He'who preser'd Lyifander to Amphares,

Has paid me with his life. My dying hand
Hath sow'd the feeds of discord and distraction.
Peace ne'er hall dwell in Sparta. Plagues on plagues
Shall rife to curse you, as- (Dies.)

Lyf. Thy foul is curt.

There the fell spirit of A'mphares fled
In imprecations. Prophet of difaflers,
Upon the difmai banks of Acheron,
Amidlt the wailing ghosts, Itill curse thy country,
And end a speech the damn'd will hate to hear.-
Behold the mother of our murder'd king.

Enter Agefiftrata and Euxus.

Ages- Alas I need not afl the fate of Agi:

Your looks, your silence fay, I have no son!
Yet speak to me, for Ican hear the worst,
I have been long familiar with affliction;
I am the widow of the fire of Agis.

Lyf. There lies the bloody author of his death
Slain by my Hand.

Ager. Alas! alas! my Con!

Oft has my anxious mind this hour foreseen,
And warn'd thee oft. But thou the dangers fcorn'd,.
When Sparta's glory was the price of peril.
O! fol of Jove, great author of our race,
Suflain my foul. For he who was my flay,
My comfort, and my Itrength, is now no more,
Yet in the path his generous spirit chore,
He fell; and conscious virtue crown'd his fall.

Lyf. So fell not false Amphares.
Eux. And Sandane.
Lyf. Sandane dead!
Eux. And dreadful was her death.

She fled, for refuge from the people's rage,
To the fame turret where Awmp ares' troops
Guarded the queen, whose mantle on the ground
She spied, and wrapt it round her wretched head;
When suddenly a tern afraflin came,
And tabb'd her, as that queen whose robe he wore.
Arriving then, I heard her ihriek for help,

Implore

Implore her country's Gods, with bitter cries,
And, in her agony divulge her crimes.
It was no wonder that (he sear'd to die.

Ages. 0 guilt! thou'rt worlt of all; he knew thee

not,

For whom I mourn. Untimely was his fate;
Yet full of high and pleasing thoughts he fell.
Great-hearted Virtue, in its swelling hour,
Scarce feels the blow that itrikes at brittle life.
The painful part is mine, in grief to live.
Would I had dy'd for thee, my son ! my son!

Euan. Euanthe's tears (hall everflow with yours,

For her protedtor and her gentle friend.
Mylterious are the counsels of the Gods;
Together Agis and Anmphares fall.

Lyf. The son of Agis lives, his infant years

Require a mother's care. Without delay
Proclaim the son of Agis king of Sparta.
To him, the offspring of my prince ador'd,
Descend the love and faith I bore to Agis.
Ye generous Thracians, who this day have hewn
The matchless worth and hon ur of your minds,
Henceforth be Spartans. And, ye Spartan youths
Whom Agis lov'd, and for whose rights he died,
Display the pirit of your dear bought freedom;
With grateful valour guard the hero's Con,
And prove that Agis perifh'd not in vain.

/gef. Condu& me, Spartans, to his dear remains.
Lyf; Forbear awhile yon dismal vault.

Enter Messenger.

lMef. My lord,

The people headed by the priells of Jove
And Hercules, in long procefllon come,
Bearing the body of their royal lord,
From that base dungeon to the fculptur'd tomb,
Which guards the sacred dull of Sparta's kings.

Enter the Procession with te Boly of Agis.

Ltf 0 Deltiny supreme !
Euan. 0 fad remains
Of youth and majelty !

gt/.

, fgef. My on My son

I !

Nature is thwarted here; thou houldfl have have borne
Thy aged parent to the silent tomb.

CHORUS..

Mourn, ye rons of Sparta, mourn,
Pour the fad lamenting firain.
Wretched people! Land forlorn!
Mourn the belt of princes lain.

Priest of upiter.

He fell not as the warrior falls,
Whose brealf defends his native walls,
To treason Agis bow'd his head,
And by his guilty fubjeets bled:
Betray'd by those his mercy spar'd;
Ingratitude was his reward.

CH ORUS,

Shame is mix'd with Sparta's woe,
Blood of kings the city Rains:
Ever let our sorrows flow,
Shame indelible remains,

Pries of Jupiter.

Yet Agis triumph'd in his fall;
For virtue triumphs over all:
Great, superior to his fate,
He only griev'd for Sparta's slate.
When Jove decrees a nation's doom,
He calls their heroes to the tomb.
Fearless they fall, immortal rife,
And claim the freedom of the Ikies.

CHORUS.

.gir triumph'd in his fafl,
Virtue triumphs over all
Such a king iliall ne'er return:
Our country and ourselves we mourn.

Prio ft

Pries of Hercules.

Agis fell, by fraud o'ercome;
Alike was great Alcides' doom.
Yet then molt worthy of his fire,
The Ton of Jove, when wrapt in fire,
Vi&orious crown'd his labours patl:
His noblest labour was the lait.

CHORUS of all.

Now in peace our hero lies,
Ceas'd his toil, his race is run;
Freedom is the glorious prize
Agis for his people won.

F I N I .

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mrs PRITCHARD.

E P I L OGU E.

Spoken by Mrs PRITCHARD.
A King in bloom of youth, forfreedom dil!

Our bard, tho' bold, durl not havefoar'dfo high.
This is no credulous admiring age

But facredure the faith of Plutarch's page.
In simple file that antient/age relates
The tale of Sparta, chief of Grecian flates: i
Eight hundredyears itflourijh'd, great in arms,
On dangers rose, and grew amidf/ alarms.
Of Sparta's triumph you have heard the cause,
More /frong, more noble than Lycurgus' laws:
Hecw Spartan Dames, by glory's charms in/pir'd
Thefon, the lover, and the husband sir'd.
Te fair of Britain's ifec, which juflly claims
The Grecian title, land of loving dames,
In Britain's cause exertyour matches charms,
fnd rouse your lovers to the love of arms.
Hid, not extina, the/park of valour lier;
Tour breath jhall raise it flaming to the skies.
Now Mars his bloody banner hangs in air,
And bids Britannia's fn n for war prepare.
Let each lov'd maid, each mother bring the Jhield,
And arm their country's champions for the field.
Arm'd and infiam'd each BritiJh breafi Jhall burn,
Noyouth unlaulrei'dhall to you return.
Then Jhall we cease t' exult at trophies won,
In gloy's field, by Heroes- not our own.
France yet Js all tremble at te BritiflJ fwor.,
//nd dread the vengeance of her antient LordJ.
