DOU G L AS:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is ated at the
THEATRES

IN
GRE AT BRITA IN and IRELAND;

Non ego fum vatis, fed prifci confcius avi.
By the Rev. JOHN H OM E.

To 'l hichl are perfixed,
1. An Addrcfs t tile Anthor. By DAVIn [-Flu MIe, Efq;

Author of tilh Hitoi y of Great-Britain, &c.

II. Copy ora an
doio and Exhortation, by the

Rev Prtbytery of Idtinburgh.
III. Copy of a Dcclaration, by the Rev. Prefbytcry

of Glalgow.

L O N D O N:
Printed by \'V i. L I .A J o 1 5 'o u, . 177-,

H:./ 4 z- t. s- 3

JN

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HOME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

(3)
An 4dJrefs fr'ni DVID H'MlE, Efq; .4Author of bhe

Hi/lory of Great-lWitain, &c. to the Rev, .Mi-.
Ho M E, Autllor of Do u C LAS, a Tragcly.

My dear Sir,

T was the Practice of the Antients to address their
CoMipofition. on!)' to Friends and Equals, and to

render their Dedications M numents of Regard and
Affction, not of Servility and Flattery. In thole Days
of ingenious and candid Liberty, a Dedication did
Honour to the P'erson to whom it was addressed, with-
out degrading the Author. If any Partiality appeared
towa ds the Patron, it was at leall the Partiality of
Friendflhip and At'rcdion.

Another Instance oftrue Liberty, of which antient

Times can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
of Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, however
different in their abltract Opinions, to maintain a mutu-
al Friendllhip and Regard; and never to quarrel about
Principles, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
ners. Science was often the Subject of Disputation,
never of Animosity Cicero, an Academic, nddrelfed
lis philosophical Trcatifes, sometimes to Brutus, a
Stoic ; sometimes to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I have been seized vith a fllong D:fire of renewing

thiee laudable Practices of Antiquity, by addrtcling the
following Difuelrttions to you, my good FIriend: For
luch I will ever call ard elleeni you, notwitliftanding
the Oppulition ll hch 1prevails between us, with Rce-
gard to many of our I'.ccuiative Tenets. There Dilfc-
rences of Opinion I have only found to enliven our
Convcrlation ; while our coimnion Pallion tor Science
and Letters served as a Cc nent to our Friend(nlp.
Ilill admilled your Genius, even when I imagined thal
you lay under the Influence of Prejudice; and yout
1omelctinies told ime, that you txcufed my Errors, on

A 2 Account

( 4 )

Account of the Candour and Sincerity, which you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell T uth, it is less my Admiration of your

fine (Genus, which has engaged me to make this
Addrels to you, than my Efteeni of your Charater and
my \tfti.ion to your Person. Thar Generosity of
Mind which ever accompanies you ; rhat Cordiality of
Friendlhip; that fpihited Honour and Integrity, have
long interested me ftronglv in your Behalf, and have
Ir.nde me desirous, that a Mo(o:iument of our Inutunl
Amrity should he publickly erected, and, ifpollible, be
preserved to Posterity.

I own too, that I have the Ambition to be the fiil

who mall in public express his \Ad;liration ofynur nol,le
Tragedy of Douglas ; one of the niofl interclling and
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any i hv . 1re.
Should I ,ive itthe Preference t, ti c \'lcrope ot X .,i;i,
and to that of Voltaire, which it relcnihlcs in its I'ib-
ject ; (hould I afirmn, th't it container d noeC Fire and
Sp:rit than the former, ii).-le tend, rnirls and ,.:iplici-
tv than the latter; I niight he accul;td oi larrialitv
And how could I entirely acqiuit ill' 11, a!ter the Pi,-
fe iions of [riendthip which I la\c mnadet yo'u ' lut the
unteigned Teats wvhich flowed ftioni evi L.vec in the
numiierns Repreltita:ions whi -h vl c erc e

made f it on

tilis 'heatre ; the unparalleled L'o'n:m.tlll, 'a.'ich vtou
appeared to have over every Att':ci on of tr'e 'iir ,aR
1ca;lt : Thhcl are incontellible I',i o, , th at;lu p.u~t-
ft si the true theatric Genius ot Shak;lpcf t anllt ()wty,
iclin;cd troin the unlioppy liajbatiito ol .- orL, and
L:cen 'io Ihel; of tile other.

Mlv LE.cmie., vou know, an l I own cven fCinrlti;,les

n)y Friends, have rep- lhlled ne vilil tlie I.o\e of
Pa;aldovcs anld linugu a'1 Opinions ; and I c\ipct tu he
eXI) .!tl to tile lal ie lm, utation, ot :.\cc. unll '; tile
Ch:,:acl:r, whikh I iavc here given of your Dirgi^ai.
I laill he told, no dou',r t;at I I .ti .irtl'ul'v cholciu the
only Tilire, w'hlin thiis hi;' Lilc.ln o Iha; I'iece could
be reg:irdedi a P.::ad..,x. o wit. lilior, ;ri Piul.iica'i-
on ; imd th.it not hibe:i; a'e ' con la.:it in tlis Parli-
cu!.tL the 'eCin L::tn s t it I Public, I ha1 ', : Icnl, re-

tult .t

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverent ... of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January 1757.

( 5 )
(5)

foivcd to go befo-e thlem. But I (hall be amply coIi-
1,nlatedl tor all these 'leic'int.izs, it you nfcept this
'Iiftclronl olf 'y Re!ird, nwid believe n11 t:. he, with
thle rt cares Sillcel ity. [)ar hir, Your mlolt atlcktionatc
I-'i: ...i, a;.i hu.;-lcl, S;:lv;.1 t,

'dinb. Jan. 3, I-rj. DA\ ID HUMSE.

) ,j 25§E -O sC2 3

23 2.15 nSa525
C.'-y o' t//' ..l.innhri:: a.? ti Exho"rftation by /les R'T'c-

r.r,: 'rCv/;'Ir of Edinbulgil,

, tlteit the 5tl' D.,y of*

ja nuiAry i 757.
T .
I 'lc tfl'er) taking into thcir fcrious Confider-

ntion, tlie dicctc!ii ,g S.a'c ofl l.ligion, the open

Protaunation o; the I.ord's i).v, th- Conteimpt u( public
\\'orlh p, thc growing I u iurv and Le% itv of the present
Ar ; in lwhic 1 so m.lnv in .en Love s of I'l easure, more
1:tn I )ve-rs of God. Alnd beiln paiticu' ,al afl'fed
v\ith the U r P. RE C D ED' COT C r

N N A NC ; given of

l.ic to tihe Pla)houfe in tiis Place, when the bta'c of
tile Nation, and the (Ciicuiilli.liCces of the Poor, make
(uch hurtful L.nrertainiiienrs fsill more pernicioul;
ju!ged it their indilpenfable Duyv to expresc in the
njllt ope n and fJl(il;i M.l- ner, tihr deep Co.cern thlcy
teel on tilis ()cafion

''llc Opinioiin hichi the C'h i('tinClhuirch has always

entertaineiitd o S'age l'lavs a;il 1'Iavrs, n- llcjudici l to
tie Iiiterelt ot'Rclig'oii andl loralirt, is v. cll known;
nlnd the fit.li It.flue:cc u hich tl-.iv coitniiinly have on
the far greater part of Ntlankind, partscularl) the young-
er Sort, is too obviou; to he c lled in Quetlion.

'I o Cnu: cr.ite how m i:', S:rl ants, Appi eCices, and

Students in I'ilfercl:t [;.anihcelc oi l.iterature, in the
t i'v andl S:tturbs, hla\rc Ibeen Ieducel filol their pro-
1' i 13uliilcl;, iyv itti nding the Sbtgc, would be a pain-
tul, !i';agreable 'I'alk.

T'Ie P'ii.(l1tcry in the 'Year 1727, when confflting

of main p, p rudent, and learned Minifttrs, whole
I',liic i i in all the Churches, being aware of there
Lvils, dk!i p.elare :, I';per, r hici was read froni the

A\ 3 ' \e.al

C )

fcveral Pu'lrpt v.'ithin tlhiir Fnliilds, :.

l tinh their

People againil the dangerous Infeclion of thc'l heatre
then ercdecd there.

In the Year '137, the Lcg;1latuic, in their great
VWifdoni, did, by an A. ot the inth of Gcor.: II.
enad and declare. " That everv Person who Ihould,
" for Hire or Reward, act, or cnule to be acted, any
" Plav, or other Enteiia'niicnt of the Stage, x ithout
"the special I.icence and Authority n:nltioned in the
" faidl \t, should be deemed a Rogue and a V\aga-
" ond, and for every such Offence Ihall forfeit the
" Sum of qn 1. S!erling."

At that '1 i:ne a Proee:t v.is let on Foot to obtain a

licensed Theatre in this City ; but the Mlaftes and Pro-
fiflcrs of the L:,iverfily, lupror'ed by the elagittrates,
having prparared a Petition, Ictri-g iolrh the drigerous
'en'ency of a P'!yhoulf here, with recpect to the
important Interc'tl of Viitue and Learning, the Pro-
jtee was laid alide.

1 lie Players, however, being so audacious as to

continue to adt in Deiance of the Law, the Presbytery
did, at their own Charge, prosecute them before the
Court of Scilions: and prevailed in the Process. The
Players were lined in Terms of I.aw ; and Warrants
being ilfued for apprehending them, they fled from
luflice. But, others came in their Place; who since
that Time have attenpted to elude the Law, by
chaniginl :le Namie of the Pi. A HoUSE into that of
the CoNCFr. qT-l \ I.L

As Iuch a flihr Evasion, the mere Change of a

Name, could no: i make the linalleft \Vati.tion in the
Nature of tlhe 'T'hi., tlhe Prcflivtcry continued tn do
all in thtir IU'o:el., a: . in their Sphiere, to prevert lihe
growving Evil; and think clirthilc! es at this 'lime
loudly called! upon. in o 'E . [ In ''. ald v.ith 'ri.
\'.I c. ro expl ul.il.ate in the Ib )vcl; ot Love and
CoImaylsion, with all under tlicii Care and inlppc-
tion.

When our gracious Sovereign. atentive to theV(,ice

of Provi. rtcc, is cilling fron t'le 'T'nh-' to Huitli:i-
tion and Prayer, how u:tlicl;y is i: tur ii. Su', cts to

;vce

the ves p to(7)irth and ollity? When t

<e thecmfclves up to Mirth and Jollity ? When the
\ Wr in which we are engaged, and nmanyv iavulTokens
of the divine Displeasure, betpea; .s, in the Lniigiage
of an inp;red Writer, to recir'r *'e Tiim k'i-'crue the
Days ,re evil, (hould that 'Time be fquan.iercd away
in running the contant Rouand of ioolih, not to fay
firl'ul \rnulfcilnets? When the Wants and Cries of the
nulii.r,,u Poor require extrnordinary Supplies, how
unaccountable is it to lavith away valf Su ns for fucli
vain and idle Put polfs ? W h n the \Vifdon of the Na-
tion has guarded the Inhabitants of ihis City and Su-
bu:bs tron :!-c ln[lction of the Stage, by a plain and
exprels Statue ; ii it nat a high Intiface of Folly, to
bleak diown that Barrier, and open a Door with their
own Hands lor theatrical Reprelenrations ? which are
in many Reltpets no Id's inconfiltent with good Policy,
than untriend l, to Religion; and will he found loon-
er cr later, to affcca their temporal as wel' as spiritual
Inteec! s.

O0, there Accounts, and tor many other obvious and

wei h!ty Considerations, the Preibytery, warmed with
jult concern for the good of Souls, do, in the Fear of
God, WARS EtxlORT, and OBTEST, all within their
13)unils, as thev regard the Glory of God, the Credit
of our holy Re'igion, and their own Welfare, to walk
worthy of' the \ ocation wherewith they are cailed, by
li iag a fIcred Regard to tile Lord's )Day,and all the
Ortdininccs ofdlivilne Inltitution ; and by dilcouraging,
in tlicir retped¢ive Spheres, the illegal and dangerous
En'ertailents of the Stage.

The Prelbyvcrv would plead with ALI. in Authority,

with 'r: tl t. RS of' Y'ou hl, PA IIENTS and MASTERS
of Fanlilies, to rtllrain by every habile Method, filch
ni are under their Influc:ce, Iroli frequenting thcre
Scliinaries of Folly and \'ice. 'Ihey would particular-
I'* l;.et rcli ih c younger Part us their Flock, to beware,
Icil, by Example, or from a foolilh Dcfire of appenr-
ir., in the iafiionable W\orld, they be minled into litch
p.rnicil,us Snarei ; Snares which muli nccelrarily re-
tard, itl not cntirelvt mar, that I'rogrefs in the respective
I'ar : of thivir Educat;o i, on which their future Ule-

fulncl's

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day of February 1757.

( s !

fulne's and Success, depend. And, iaitlv. tlih wvould
intreat and ob:e: l'crflns of ali Ra:Ils and ConlJitons,
that inill;ad of contriburling to th. .ov .ing l.iccintioul-
ness of tie Age, t!hnyv ii;v ;: inguif hthc;nlttc es by
shining as Liglht in ilhe\o idl, lI ingr hl;::iclcl' and
Iiarnlclk, the Sons ot God, with 'ut R':bhkt , in the
M;idl i ofa crooked and pe; c fe Nat io; o c rc cu v '' (:,
hii thc great PL:rpolIe of the

Is nour oso (;od aInd the

(ood t

of ':ankind, tliat Tiltic, that Su!'fa;:cc, and

those other '1 alent s w iich tlicv h:ie ;rccivcd ioin
their Lord and MoIlier.

On the w hioltc, tlc I'rcf ivterv do, in thc niofl carndff

Manner, call upo.t anl v.lio I'\ve the Iln'rc!l of Religi-
on at Hv:r t, tu pc i .'r cr.'i a: t'ic ih r .r' of Grace,
in the pre iailin .; inae ol the cie.: :vl diaror, until
the Spirit Ib; ,i.:' upon l 'si. ,. !, /: h, anpl.' t/ il-
d!ernel I, an fr,- it /, i. .'l

l ,.' .'/ Si !J e
' :ir ,nt-

f.,, a F,'e': ' TIcn ?7:',/,.c,;: ./ - :

.'. ,n tl.e I'il-

deitrr:cl ', ;',!/ l(t o-t.' .:/,It r -,:'.7a::: i,; :/e f uitfu/ F/el;
rund t,'e I1 orkk oj Ri ,'.Steoui/nefs Jbltl be Peace, , nd the
L:sel of Rigltcou:,bfcj, uietncfj andl /Ilfluancefor ewer.

The I'rcfvtery appoint this At)x oxI ITrO and

rEx iolr T r\TI to be read from ; 1 rl the Pulpits with-
in their Bounds, on the Inft Satl'.at, being the thirti-
cth Day of ::is .lon:h, i::;:. Jia:c-lI' :fe; di i. c Ser-
vice bclo:e Noon
Copy of the DecLi-..'i'l 6f t!,'c P:. Pr. !lterry ofGIf-

gO.', ,l :,.i '.! e 1 4;.." c,. lI , ,ii' 1 757
' lTHE Prcflr. t:ry o'rGril.'v. hnvirgle cn a p-intedi

l'iper, Inti:co. An A\.lti'n i i, a)d; l. :xIortaliojn

ot tI:c l.\ c'rend Prefl)vreiy ol Ldiiihurgl), htic:', a-
in .., u:'1.c I:vils prevailintg, liiilents thl cxtraordlila riy

;. : : r; Ci:, 'r. ;c:'ti CountIci nce g uol o late to tlhe

l''axv;onit. in that ( :ty; ai.d h:i i dn

g )li Reason to he-

lit.e , ti . tis rler:s to tlil f1. l'u il. t I ..l.tr chi)iv but
no o iti t a;ts, that one who ti :a .i;,nl'r tin the
ki. uici o bcotland did h11l1i1lf wite and cotIl !'Il' a

(9)

Stage-Plav, iitltetll, T!e 'T-rae.jy of Douiglu,and got
it to be acted ontlhe Theatre at Fdin!nurgh ; and that
hic, with il.'veral othe, Ministers of this Church, were
p'cfent, and oime of them oftner than once, at the
arting of the said Play before a nunerous Audience:
Ihe Picfbytery being deeply affeltcd with this new
and firange Appearance, think it their Duty to declare,
as they hereby do, that they agree with the Presbytery
o1' Edinburgh in their Sentiments with refpet to Stage-
I'lavs; and particularly that such Entertainments, from
·what has been usually exhibited in them, and also
foin the dilTolute Lives (for the most part) and infa-
nous Characters of the Players, have been looked up-
on by the Chrillian Church in all ages, and of all dif
ferent Cominunions, as extremely prejuu:icial to Reli-
gion anl Morality. rs wetll as hurtlul to the other va-
luable lI.it;efL o(i' Ii uliln Suciety, by tlie wasteful Ex-
pencp o,' Mloney and 'ime they have occasioned! and
bcei;g convinced by long Experience, a sure Test of
the Tendency of any AAtion or Practice, how vain it
is to expect such a Reformation of the Stage as is con-
fifent with the Ends aforesaid; and therefore such
Lntertainments should de discouraged and laid aside:
And the Prelbytery fuither confidering, that the un-
precedented Countenance given to the Play-house, in
the Instance mentioned, is greatly aggravated by a
\ate AC of Parliamnent, rendering the Stage (because
not licenced) unlawful in Scotland, and alto from the
prelent Circuiiftances oi the Nation with regard to
the \'ar we are engaged in, the Dearth ofProvifions,
and the awful Tokens of the Divine Anger against us:
Thcy therefore hereby appoint and inftrul Ifuch of
their Mhltimbers as shall reprcfent them in the enftuing
general Aireinbly of this Church, to move and infill
in a regular Manner, that tie venerable Aflcinbly do
declare, by a publick Acd, their Judglment and that of
this Nn'ional Churcl, againift the Entertainments ot
the Theatre, as of very hultlul ''endency to the In-
terells ofl eligion and bociety. 2dly,'I'hat the Affemn-
LIlv do Ifrictly enquilc whether the Fads above men-
tioned, viz. that a Minitler ofthis Church ha3 com-

poled

( lo )

posed and procured to be acted on the Theatre of the
Canolngate of Edinburgh, the Tragedy called Douglas,
and that the Repre(entation of the said Tragedy was
artcnded by him anil ;;veral other Mlinilters, have
been under the Conticleration of the Presbyters relpec-
tivecv concerned ; and whatever thele Ministers, hav-
ing bccn found guiltv, have been censured as their
Fatlt'- dclfcrved ; and to give such Dirctions as thev
in their \i!;lu ionfl.1 il find neccifrry, that such iini-
fter: and ail otlicis may be lenfii)le that the Chumch
ot Scotl ;nl will never protect her Miemhbes in a Prac-
tice lb unhecoming their Character, and of Iuch per-
niciolis Tende'.-y to the great Interests ol Religion,
Indullry and Vi tue. And latllv, that the Assembly
would use their best Endeavours to obtain such an
Explication a -.d E;-forcement of the Ad of the 17th
of Geo. 11 anent the Playhouse, as it may not be lia-
ble to the pitiful Evasions by which it is now eluded.

PROLOGUE.

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

Spokcn by Mr. S P A R K S.
.V i, r.',t t'lcs, -a,when Britnin' trade 'was arms,

n., le Iov'd mlu/ick of lher yo th alarms,

A qo l '.ke race i/l'iain'dfair England's fame:
I/lo tzia not hear d ofgallant PIE R Y's name?
/y. and of Do UG LAS ? Such illuflrious soet
In rital Rome and Carthage never rose !
From age to age bright jfone the Britilhfire,
And every hero 'was a hero's fire.
1l'hen po-werl;l f/ae decreed one tzvarrior's doom,
U'p ./rung the Phoznix from his parent's tomb.
But wililtl il ote genetrous rivals fought and fell,
'Tl, kr gencr:us ri,'als lov'd each other well:
T7o' ,navy a bloody fieldl was loft anl twon,
Notlhinf in hate, in honour all 'was done,
11 hen Pt1 RC t viw'ng'd defy'd his prince or peers,
Fail came tl'e Dou o L .x s, 'with his Scottiflh pears;
Anl vlwen pri ,.l Do u c, L A s made his King his foe,
Fr Do i (; . A 5, P1 E Rc V hent his Englill bouw.
Ixxpcll'l tleir 'alive Jhome by aiverfe fate,
T.bey Xknsok', alternate at each other's gate:
7'i'en l/a-z'.1 lhe ca//11, at the midnight hour,
F1,' hin -uvl/'i' aI's lhadl /hook its fir'nefl toUwer.
'l ths ni /,: a 1) I r .; 1. .\ your prote'lion claims ;
.A .vie/! a n/'l.cr ' pi.y'S softest names:
The /I',y .,f hrer '.c,;c indulgent hfar,
And grlnt your /;ppliant all /he beg', a tear;
In c,,nide/i, j7'e bgs ; ant hopes to finl
LEah Llnglil btreail lik,' noble PIE RCY's, kind.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSONE.

LONDON. EDINBURG H. DUB IrN.

Lord RANDOLPHI, Mr. RIDOUT, Mr. YOUNGER. Mr. DXTF.R.

(;LENALVOK. Mr. SMITH. Mr. LovE. Mr. STAYLEY.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY. Mr. D,;.cs. Mr. SHERIDAN.

STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAN. Mr. LEE.
SeRVANTS.

WOM E N.
MA^TII.A, Lady RAN-} Mrs WorrFNGTON. Mrs. WARn. Mrs. KE.,irnY.

D I.PH, s
ANNA, Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HOPKImS. Mif. G. Piiii.Pp.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

DOUGLAS:

A

TRAGEDY.

>
4tp Cto) *7 c4-^ * tl 4s c

ACT I. SCENE I.
T7e crirt of a caflle, furroundledr with vtcodls.

Enter Lady RANDOLrH.
Y E woods and wilds, whose mnelanciioy glo m

Accords with my foul' ladnefs, and draws forth

The voice of sorrow from my bursting hell t,
Fa-e:.vel a wlile I w\ill not leave you long;
For in your flildes I deem romie fpilit dwells,
\\'Who rom the chidiing ttream. or groaning oak,
Still llhers, and answers to IAT II. ).x's moan.
) Do c i. \sx D t: (; . s ! If deparrtd gholIls
A' e'er p.rllittl t tview

t) ViC hls .voidl.

\\ ithin [,ie circle f ht lat v.ood thou arr,
And with the pllin of iiiinoitals lleir'l
My ilamentaion : heai'll thy wre'!celJ wife
\\cep toi her hIulband lain, her inlant loll.
My brother's timie.tfl death I leiell to mIluurn,
Who perilh'd with thee on thii fatal dav.
'I' thee I lit'; iv voice; to thee addrelf
The lIlaint vwhiclh mort;il car .has never heard.
O dilreg:-Jd ml ntr ; tholghl I aml ai'J
.\X jtlu;li'.i Ilov, 1', l
he1 t is xlC,)lly rnI;: .

hlic pille

Incapable of change, affetion lies
Buied, mIy Do u G LA. , in rhy bloody grave.
But R\ - ,: o

i I. PH cones, whomn tate has mainde my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and d.-laud the dead.

Enter Lord R.A DOLlil.
Lord Ran. Again there weeds of woe ! fay, do'st thou

well

To feed a palfion which consumes thy life ?
'1he living claim fonie duty ; vainly thou
Betcow'tt thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without niimeorial of his name,
He on!y now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. Time, that wears out the trace ofdeepefl

anguish,

Has pad o'erthee in vain. Wou'd thou wer't not
Compos'd of grief and terdernefs alone!
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir M/IA r.c o M :
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he finil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady Ran. Oh ! rake notup the alhes of my father:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the DoUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my anceflors
Coinpell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's plealant banks; and now, of then
No heir is left. Had they not been To tern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lo d Ran.Thy griefwrefts to its purposes my words.

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
\hich in the breadls of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection, and complacent kindness
Were all I willh'd for; but I wilh'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The llorm of war that gathers o'er this land:
It' I hould perish by the Danifl sword,
MAlrTI i.i), would not shed one 'I'ear the more.

Ladv Ran. Thou do'lt not think so: weful as T am

I love thy merit, and eftecm tly viltucs.
But whither gocft thou now ? Lord

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,
htre every warrior on the tip-toe lands

Of cxpetlation, and impatient alks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are lan- ed.

Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coalc ot Scotland, diive their fleet!
And every foldierof both hosts return
In peace and safety to his plealant home!

Lord Ran.Thou Ipeak'tl a woman's, hear a warrior's

wihl :

Right from their native land, the stormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Imnmoveable in Caledonia's itrand !
Then lhall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal shore

Lady Ran. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

Whose manners, language, and whose looks are trange,
Is not lo hoirid, nor to me to hateful,
As ;h. t wlhich with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy diawn, divides the filler kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins ae to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world;
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mull have war, mngte dillant war,
But with each other tight in cruel conflict.
Gallant in ilrilf, anid noble in their ire,
The battle ij their pallime. 'They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to uiiiiiier port:
\\ hen cv'ning comies the glory of the miorn,
The youthiiil warrior is a clod of clay.
Thus t:ll the priie of either haplcis land;
And ficih the iruit of Scotch and [ nglilfh wars.

I.ord Ra:. I'll hear ro nlore: this leludv wotild malke

A oIldie. drop his fIorii, and duif his arns,
Sit down :,n.l wetp thl conquelts lie lias Ilade;
Yea, (like a nmonk,,, fi:ig rcll and peicc in lht:av'n,
To louls of' warriols in his battle slain.
J. iy, fa.rc l: I leave thee not ;!one;
onider co::i: u:le ili,ol loi\c Iakcr duty light.

Enter

Enter A-, N .

/4,:nr Forgive thi ralhlnfel oi' our A\ NA.\' love:

L'rg'd by aifTition, 1 havc thus preliun'd
To inter;upt your folirary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you neglect,
Anti lose in sadness.

Lady h'an. So to lose my hours
Is all the uie I with to make of time.

dnna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my itate:

But su;e I am, ince death firll prey'd on man,
Never :ii 'i:tcr thus i brother mnourn.
What had your sorrows been it you hid lolt,
In carly vouth, the hulband of your heart ?

Laidv Ran. Oh
Anna Have I diftreft you with officious love,

.And Ill-tim'd mention of your brothel's ttte ?
Forgive me, lady: humble tho' 1 am,
' he mind I hare partakes not of mlly fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These pieous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power direted thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

Anna. I know not:

But since my wo:is have made my nmftrefs tremble,
I will speak to no more; but silent mnix
My teals with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou (halt not be silent.

1'll trull thy faithful love, and thou (halt be
H-encetottl. th'inltruted partner of'ily woes.
But what avails it? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never ebbing time ?
C.lmpcl the catth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

!Anna. What means my noble miftrcrs ?
Lady R.,mn. Didfl thou not afklwhat hadl my furrows

been ?-

I' I in early youth had loll a husband ?--
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Ml.nli'd with wounds, the huRband ot my youth;
Ami in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. nn---t

Anna. 0! lady, mofl rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave Brother should in battle save
'The life of Do uI LAS' son, our houfc's toe:
The youthfu! wanior vov.-'d tt;annl friendship.
To fee the vaunted fitot of his friend
Impatient, DouCLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd naie.-lMy heart he gain'd;
Nor did 1 long refuse the hand he begg'd:
Mly brother's prelence authoriz'd our marriage.
'I'hree Weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Itad o'er u; flown, wv'ln iiv lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his f.rlher's l.,tcles; and with himn,
In (pite c. all Iny tcars, d

i IMALCOLM go.

Scarce were thy gone, when my stern lire was told
'iThat the fadl; (ranger was lord DouGL AS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his (word
And queftion'd me. Alone, forfuken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
Anoath equivocal, that I ne'er wou'd
Wed one of Dou c L.s'name. Sincerity,
'IThou tirft of vir'ues, let no mortal leave
'I'h onw:urd pa:h ! .idih' the earth shou'd gape,
And ioniw the gulf of hell d:t uition cry
ITo take dilsimulatiol's winding way.

.Inna Alaz! how c-.v of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth to hardy !

Lady Ran. The firli truth

. ciaflelt tJ avow. Th'lis moral learn,
'1his precious moral, lioil my tragic talc.
In a fe days tbe dread:\il tidings c:a:le
That Do UGLAS and my brother both were (lain.
My lord ! lly life! my hutbanld!-nlighty God i
\'What had I done to merit such afflltion ?

Anna. My dearest lady! Many a tale of tcars

I've liftendl too; but ne'er did 1 hear
A tale to lad as this
Lady Ran. In thti firfi d iy)

B3 3f

Of my dillraRinlg grief, I found mnIfllf--
As women wilh to be who love thlir lords.
But who durlt tell my father ? The good pricll
Who join'd our hands, my brotler's ancient tutor,
VW;ith his lov'd M\ILCOI.M. in the battle fell
They two alone were privy to the marliage.
On silence and concealment I relolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune Inine.
That very night on which my lon was born,
My nurse, the only contident I had.
Set out with hinm to reach her lilter's hou!c:
But nurfc, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, A .;A, since that faral hour.
My murder d child !-had thy fontl mother sear'd.
The lols of thee, the had loud fame delf'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's griet,
And wander'd with thee tiro' the scorning world.

Anna. Not seen, or heard of! then perhaps he lives.
L.ady Ran. No It was dark December: wind and rai-

Hlad beat all night. Acrols the Carron lay
The dellin'd road; and it's fvelling flood.
My faithful fervrult perilh'd with my child.
O haplcfs son ! of a inoll haplcs fire !
But they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permited me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compcll'd to wed
RA.noLPI, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RAN DoL.P now poflelfes the domains,
''hat by Sir MA LCOL. X's dea'h on Ime devolv'd
Domains, that filould to D 1 ; L.\ S' son have giv'n
A baton's title, and a baron's power.
Such were mny oothing thoughts, wi. , I bcwail'd
'The laugihte'd father of a Ifn unborn.
And when that Inl came, like a ray froin heav'n,
Whichl Ilines and tilppcars ; alas ! m v chilil
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, Ihe knew not how, rct'l.r'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away;
But left tlill undiminilb'd her dclire, .Atta.

Anna. The hand that spins th'uneven thread oflife,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of yous's

Lady Ran Not in this world: I have confider'd well

It's various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas I how oft does goodness wound itlelf ?
And sweet affetion prove the spring of woe.
0: had I died when my lov'd husband fell!
Had Come good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, , hen 1 beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, wl:ofe minillers good angels are,

Hath shut the book in mercy to manKind.
But we mull leave this theme · GLEN ALVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he llowly stalks his way.

Lady Ran. 1 will avoid him. An ungracious person

Is doublv irksome in an hour like this.
A.4nn.\Vhy speaks my lady thus of RA N DOL H'S heir ?
Lady Ran. Because he's ,ot the heir of RANDOLP 'S

virtues.

Subtle and (hrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himifelf:
And he with cafe can vary to the tafle
Of different men, it's featues. Self-denied,
And malter of his appetites he feemis:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
W\'achcs to lfize unleen the wih'd-tor prey.
Never were vice and vi:tue pois'd so ill,
As in GI. N A.\ UN'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And lands alo;t in thele unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and dc;ain him till I reach the caflle.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPW.

Anna. 0 iLppincfs ! where art thou to be found ?

I fee thou dwellft not with birth and bcauiy,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth array'd:
Nor doll thou, it would feerm, with virtue dwell;
Elle had this gentle lady Ilils'd thee not.

Enter GI.ENALVON.
G.'er. What doll thou muse on, meditating maid ?

B z Like

l ike some cntrnnc'd and vifionirv fcer
On earth thou ftand'll, thy thought ai(lend to lhavCen.

.Inna. \\ou'd , l.it I were, e'el .s tholu lx 'd, a leer,
'Io have my dou:,rs iyv hav 'nly vision clear:d !

Glen. \\ hat dost t;ou doubt ot? v hat hall thu to do

'With fubjtcEt iintricte ? ' hy yautrh thv ltcnitv,
Ca'nnot be quellioned: tnink ofthefe good gifts;
\ndl then thy conte.&,plations will be pleating.

Anna. Let women view yon niolumillent ot woe,

Thln boast ol beaut"' who so f;ilr s sic .?
!lu! I inuft follow : ' .s Ieolvir g l:iy
Awakes the mm(!1ory .f lher anci.nt woes Exit. Annl.

(G . F N A ,. V' N Jolls.

So!-Lady RANDOlI.IH shuns ime; by and by

Fil woo hcr as the lion does his Lidcs.
'he deed's a doing now, tl; it nakes me lold
Ofthefe rich valleys and a cilief of power
The season is in, ft apt; my foundir, lteps
Will not be hear( aniidif the din o, n1
RAN, DOLPH has liv'd to lo:g : hi= better tltC
Had the ascendant once, and kept nie down:
V\ hen I had le;z'd the dame, by chance he came,
lefcu'd and had the lady for hii laIbour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a fiender cci.tlatiun !
lHeaven is my witnie's that I do not lo';
To sow in pelil, and let others reap
The jocund harvel. Ytt I am not farc:
I;y love, or foencthing lie it, flung, inflsa,'d,
Madly I blabb'd-lny pa-!ion to lis w ile,
And lhe has threaten'd to acquaint hiii of it.
''he way of woman's will I do not know
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly
t will not live in fear: the nmn I d. cad
Is as a Dane to ie ; ay, and the mian
Who stands betwixt me and my chief defie.
No bar but he; the has no kinlman near;
No brother in his filter's quarrel bold;
Anr for the righteous caul'c, a firanger's cause,
1 know no chief that will defy GLE K ALVON.

ACT

# ACT II. SCENE I.

A C T 11. S C E N E r.

A Court, &c.
E;:er fertRants an'l al ranigcr a t or:c lo-r, and l.n.iy

RAN DOLPI atnd ANN Xs r anotlr.
Lady Ran. II.THA'i' mrans till cilnliiu ? lt:anger,

¥W s licak Iccurc;

aft th -lu bee:r wronJ l have these rude mnen prefuim'd
'Io tex the weary t.aieller on his way;

il Ser.t'. By' u 110no lira er ever itffer'd lwrong

Trils man withl ouici , wild has c;ill'<d us torth;
So loie at,-aid he ctnr.n: (peak his tears

Enter Lor,.' R N DO L P H andyo .ng man, vii t/! t ir

/7Jr2lt, lr,;;.tt' and bloagy.
Lady Ran. Not x,.iil tle tranger's tiars ! how fares

n : lord ?
I.,.d ,Ra:. 'lhat i: fares well, thanks to this gallant

vouth.

Whose valour.sv'd me from a wretched death I
A, down the winding dale I v.alk'd alone,
Ar the crcfi way itur armed men attack'd ine
Rovers, I judge, fromi the liccnrious camp,
Who would have quickly laid L rdi RAN IOL PH low,
lad not this brave and generous li anger coImie,
Like my gi)od angel in the hour o' fate,
And, locking danger, made my foes his own.
They turi'd upon him ; but his attive arm
S'ruck to the ground, Irom whence they rose no more,
The fielceft two ; tile others fled amixin,
And leti' hliin ailer of the bloody field.
Sp.k, l.ady IANDoI.PH ; upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and lold.
Speak, noble damne, aid thankl hin for thy lord.

Lady Ran My lord canno; :peak wl at now I fel,

My heart o'erflows with gratitutle to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknJwn
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at lctil, but huinancly brave
Fought on ytmi fide against 1'cl Icartul odds.

Have

Have you yet learn'd of himl whom we (hould thank?
%Whomli call the saviour of Lord RA NDOLPIH' life ?

Lord Ran. I alk'd that queRion, and he anfwer'd not:
But I mnurt know who my deliv'rer is. (to the Stranger.)

Strang. A low born nlan, of parentage obscure,

Who iluugit can boall but his desire to be
A foidier. and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. \W'hoe'er thou air, thy spirit is ennobled

By the gicat King of Kings' thou art ordain'd
And ftalilpt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature! bult h not, flower of incdefty
A, well as v:ilour, to declae thy birth.

S'ttiang. Mynaire isNoRVAL ; on tile Grampian hills

My latilt r teeds his flocks; a fiugal twain,
Whole conltant cares were to encreafe his store,
And keep his only son, myltelf at home.
For I hadl hard of battles, and I long'd
To tollow to the field fonie warlike lord;
And h:luven so n granted what my fire denied.
This moon which role lati night, round as mly fliild,
l-lad not yet fiil'l her horns, wlhen, by her light,
A band ot ficlce baibanians, froml the hills,
Rull'd like a torient down upon the vale,
Sueccping our flocks and herds. The flepherds fled,
For tafety, na'd for thccour. I alone,
W ith bended how, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and niark'd
The road he took, then halted to my friends:
Wohom, with a troop of fifty cholen men,
I miet advancing. 'he pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Rcturniing hi nce in triumnph, I di.dain'd
The fIhephcli's ,ll)ithfll lie ; and having heard
That our good kirlg ha I lumiinon'd his hold peers
To lead their warimors to the Carron lide,
I Iiit my iathei' houle. and took with me
A clhoten lervant to conduEt my fleps:-
Yon trei.ibli\g coward who tfolbok his nailer.
Jouineyipg '.nith taii intent, I pall theef towers,

And,

Ar;d, heaven ditrted, came this day to do
'Ihle happy deed that gilds my hulible name.

Loid Ran. He is as wife as brave. \.as ever tale

\\ith fucbi a gallant modefly rehears'd?
My brave deliverer! thou shalt enter now
A nobler lill, and in a monarch's liiht
Contend with princes for the prize of tfme.
I \ ill prlecnt thee to our Scottifl Ki.;g,
\W hole valiant fpil it ever valour lov'd,
H1! mly Ml-T I I. LD ! wherefore flarts that tear?

I.ady Ran. I cannot lhy : for various atfeCtions,

And Ltrangely mingled in my bofoinl well;
Yet eacl of them nmay well command a tear.
1 ioy that thou art ;lat;e a; ad dmire
Himn and his fortunes vwho hath vwrought thy farety.
Obscure and friendless, he the army flught,
Bent upon peril, in the range of JIeath
Resolved to hunt for fame, and with his fIwotd
To gain dillindion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might ha e perilh'd,
And gaii'd with all his alour, but Oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue lerves no more
Bencath dcrpair. The foldiernow of hope
lie llands confpicuotus ; fame and great renown
Ale lotughit within the compals or his Ivord.
On this Iny iiind reeclede, whilst you lpoke,
And blcls'd the wonder-working L.ord of heaven.

Lord Rin. I'ous alnd lratelul ever are thy thoughts.

My deeds (hall follow whiere thou point'llt the way!
Next to Iniyfelf antd Cqtil to G. LENAI. VO N,
In honour and commnland [hall No Kv AL be.

NAr.. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In Ipzecli and manners. never till this hour
Stood I in luch a piretnce: vet, mv lord,
'I'here's lioetlhinlg i:i Iny brealt which nmake3 me bold
T o lay, that NOKVAm. ne'er will Ihanme thy tivour.

I.ady Rwn lwill be (iworn thou wilt not. Thou hlalt be
Mly knight; and ever, as thou didft to lay,
\Vith happ.l valour guard the lile of RA N D L P t.
I ord Ran. W\ll hall thou spoke. Let me forbid reply.

[To NORVAL.
\W are thy debt,,rr still; thy high dcfeit

O'ertops

# SCENE II.

O'crtopsour graritude. I mult proceed,
As v..ir ar till h iended, to the cailp.
Sonei ot' i', trail) I fee are spee.ling hither,
lii: ;aienr, douitlefs, of theil lord's del.iv.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thi.,e eves shall fee
'1 Ie chJlIn v.arniors ol thy nati\e lald,
\\ ho lar.guilh for the fight, and beat the air
\Vith brandifli'd lwords.

Nrv. Lc u hbegone, my lord.
Lord Ran
1 [T La ly RA N D 0. P 1 ], About the tine

tint the aeclining un

Shall his buad o.bito'el )o'l lJi'l: f'ufpcnd,
Fxpcc u- to retunr. 'I li.. nislgt once miore
\ ithiin thele walis I rei: ; :iy tent I pitch
To-muorro. in the li;li. Prepire the feall
FIre is 1,: ileart x ino suo his cuuntry fights:
lic ir- rilc xc of ba;;le ulav rcfign
1 l;ilc;, to locial plenlure; fi.eteteft then,
V' hen Aihngcr t, a loldier's toul endears
'1 ih lhuman joy that never may return

[Exeulnt RAN DOLI' H and NORVAL

SCENE II.

Lady RA no . PH and AN N A.

I.aJyRian. His parting words have Itruck a fatal truth.

O) ') r', .A s !Do L .LAs ! tender was tihe timel
\when -e two parted, ne'er to meet again !
1-o \ many yea, s of alguilh and derpair
I la heav'n annex'd to those fwilt palling hours
(Of I \ e and tondnels Then my bolom's flame
Olt. :,. blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Rerurn'd, and witi redoubled ardour blaz'd.

.4nlra. May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balms of

peace

Into the wuunds that fetecr in your breast
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. Ole unlv cure can hl-av'n itfelfbcflowj--

A glave-that bed in w.iich the waity retl,
\\ retch that I am! Alas! whi) an I so?
At every h.pp/ parent I repine!
I low blest the mother of yon gallant N v A I. i

She

S!>c lo;r a li. ig 'L.nlbind bore her plirs,
Aft hc1a:tl i',i:i !,lc I her when :1 :an wns born:
She iui'd ii-l i

h :1 irp infant on her breast;

IFended the chi'd. and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with aiFcritnl's tiumnip, p liw the youth
In grace and coniclinetfl tfrpafs his peers:
Whillt I to a dcad Husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

Anna. Alas! alas! why will you thus rcetume

Your grief atrefl ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you trom your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has d.ign'd on other objects to beflow.

Lady Ran. Delighted fay'll thou ? Oh ! even there

mine e)e

Found fuel for my iife-confuming lorrow.
I thought, that had the ton of DouGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant stranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape:
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with b!ooming N o RV A L might havenumber'J.
Whilll thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young llranger, wand'ring fron his home,
And like an orphan cal upon my care.
I will protet thee, (said I to mytlelf)
With all my power, and grace with ail my favour.

Anna. Sure heav'n will blel's so gen'rous a resolve.

You mull, my noble dane. exert your power:
You mufl awake: devic j will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at :,.c breat} of No RVAL.

Lady Ran. G I.ENALvo N'S false and crafty head

will work

Againif a lival in his kinfilan's love,
If I deter him not: I only can.
Bold a- he is, GLRN^ALvoN will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I railb.
'11 be the artill of young No RV Al .'S fortune.
'I is pr-afing to admire : noill apt was I
Tlo this affetion in my better days;
'Il ouail now I Iccll to you (hrunk up, retir'd

C Withi;

\Within the narrow coiipo(s of my woe.
Have you not fometrimne ken in ea-lY fi.)rer
Open i,'s bud, and spread i:'~ Ii ken le lvcs,
I'o canch sxweet airs, aad odour. t. hbe!o , ;
Thcn, by the keen lUaC nipt. pull la V c-.I Li,
Andi, tho' It;1 livinz, die to lcent Ind beautv

binblen of mice! zffiiCkion, iiL.e a fioru;,
Hlih kill'd the fCo ward hIL1uniii of my. hiert.

I'nert GLF NA LVO' 0

C!l W \he-e ~ tv (1ere CL kinn'iiii-,ru De 0) L P I!

ladly R'a,. Iav%, V'oL no: 1: :ti, (Gl A
IE u\ , ot

t~te b'atc--
,t 1 have : nad tlint te:l~t iaVn:t.r

Wicth a Criong band I have bt girt the wo nd
If they lurk there, ailve thelv Ill-' he t IL(,
And tortu:e force fbos theniii itopor :: :t Ieeret
\\ hethc sil- IOrtbn cue of R, l No L. it'iilurd th cl o: JJdb,
(Jr i'--

Lrdv E;K:, Tiiai cnre axcjsws a oirii:an's io e.
I have a cjurfelsotr CGLI tAt VON': el- ( Nri ANNA

GIb n. To hVnt \'ur cuCI-ctjl alwva a: e cianr.
1,:v Ran. I ca' c no: i'c", Ic: tluu u: kLiowan to

111c.
I.ad('v ata . I,'u iioqt Ceitt.ii i: tit\ clO It' of k:'''

~ \\ at d0v -, ii `:'' Ii bhc li :l ble ilcd c i U.',

Y'ou Inudi alvatn e 1112 Nc; C.es-e,' (bing,
Y out1fels e1'ce t,

c u: :1. thu! ;tc:o sG L L NA LVO 04

I .ad~ Ran 1 z ull, ~o hold :;d ioff ~h:tr tiike a ticr

(Jul tI v w1 ~ t~i Ill, to tile,

A lav h lltltlto COEe .1 d ~ Iil di'.ulg'd,
AV011lJ ii kr, tile" to' ,r...'~os lo..

IL!, Ct

tI si Ii ,l p tied tot,
F0: it i I:,'1r IRiC like din.

Tl,, I)1

LI I 'rilo ".t oii.qik~iii,l I

Perit:' It' e:to tl tV1: ti:e: I, rd or1 inl

\\ totr I ': C v - 1r -

l t' 1. t iu ' bolu.L,1.
It' Iti. i! b 07 I ove to nic''

:,l mic -1. - J
hic

# SCENE III.

,".h':', '1

on ;' "iCT' r.t fie -,, i F','^,'\ ;

A ,, n',

. ' *.,' ' , 1 eik' H 2il 1 hit;, loril,

.t.d o : l'i.eI, i-i: rti- i;iv s ad'vanccs tl'ill;
A, si. e, when k;i.. ild by our I:iephcrds, ,noves
'Ii'ro' t;e dri hcat' hib!'orc the ftinning xxind.

Lady RaI. Rct-r\ e th I- accents for iollb ohlerear,

'To loi 's apology I litten not
lMark tholl myi wnrd ; for it is meet thou fhould'll.
His brave dc l T'eretr I ', Do LPI' here rL:aias.
Perlihp3 his pief.iice innynot please thcc vcll:
But, at ti'v reil, practice aught agai;,f lhimi-
Let no-r t l jc.ilouy' attempt to shake
And lo0s.1 the good root he has in Rx N D O L P ;
\.'hoi t:

Ii oulrirs I know thou has lupplanted.

Thou look'11 at me, as if thou fain woildu'll pry
Into my heart 'Tis open as my fpccclh.
I ,ive thii early cau ion, and put on
' he curb, before my temper breaks av.ly.
The frienillels Rfranger my protecdion claims:
liis friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Ext.v

SCENE III.

MLiLner G . L: .'.Lvo :.

Child that I was, to fart at my own Ihadow,
And be the fhallo'. Ibol of coward conlficencc I
I am not what I have been; wlhat I Ihould be.
The darts of definy have allnoil pierc'd
My maible heart. Had I one grain of taith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I fliould conclude there was an artn above
That fought againrl icm,;lnd malignant turn'd,
To catch inyllel', the tLi,'le inare I let.
W'hy, rape and murder are not fiiiple mean !
Thl' i;iiperf'c't rape If RIA , n

x .

i Li gave a tipoule;

And the' ilcinti'd mIuider ilntrodiLu'd
A f'\aoudite to hid lhec Iutl fnr::, mIe;
And v.'ortl o 'all, a lival. Burning hell:
This s ere tliv center, it I thought the lov'd hini !
'1i ccttain fth coiiteiri ,tie; nla comman; nds iec,
Andl waves the (i;ig o her (jililcfi eare o'er tie,
In hi. bclhali. A\I lh.ll 1 thus e brav' ?

C a Curb'd,

# ACT III. SCENE I.

Cuxb'd, as (he calls it, by dame chatity ?
Infernal fierds, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bolomb with vour fires
And policy remoifelefs? Chance may spoil
A single aim; but perfeve:ance must
Prosper at last. For chance and fate are words:
Pcrfitlive wifdonm is the fate of man.
Darkly a projec peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rnfing in the east,
Crofs'd and di\ided by strange colout'd cloud;
I'1 seek the fiave who came with NORVAL. hiler,
And for his cowardice was spurred trom him.
I've known a follower's rankled bosom breed
\enom most fatal to his hcedlefs lord. [Exit

A C T II. S C E N E

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter A.NNA.
Amna. T HY vassals, G:ief! great nature's ordet

1 break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
\\hillt Lady RANDOLrH sleeps I will walk forthi
And talte the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her lumbers be! Ye minitlers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and leraphs who deligh: in good:eis !
Fotlake your skies, and to her couch delcend !
'here from her fancy chafe thofc difilal forms
That haunt her waking ; her fad Ipirit charm
\\ ithi images cclectial, such as plcalc
l he blell above upon their golden bed3.

Enter SE RV A 'JT.

er'v. One of the vile alf.ilins is secured.

W'e tounl the illiailn nrking in the v ood:
.\ iil direald:ul iinprecations he denies
All .nowlceg'c of the crin.c But this isnot
Hlis :ll elray t h':!e jewvIs were conceal'd

# SCENE II.

In the most secret places of his garment;
Be:ike the spoils of(o:ne that he has murder'd.

Ann.. Let me look on them. Ha ! here isa heart,

The chosen crest of Do UGLAS' valiant name!
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit ANNA.

Enter servants with a prisoner.

Prf. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

\i? Serv. You lay so, Sir !

But torture soon Ihall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Laly of Lord R N DOLP H comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

S C E N E II.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.'

,nna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,
which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady Ran. Thou fialt behold me, with adelperate

heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The prisoner kneels.]
Prif Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and

mild!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me, lady ! from there cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accufc
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment ieat of God,
'he tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce ?

i17 'erva. We found him lurking in the hollowGlyna,

\Vlhen view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
\'c overtook hin, ani, enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Nut satisficd with this, we (earcl'd his cloa:tis,

C j And

And found thefle jewels ; swhole rich vai!e plead
Iloil powerfully againlli hi. Ila, lie tIeCis
AndJ old in viilliiv. I'crlit us tiv
His ltiJ:)!iornri c!'.; a il:lt tlhe toituit' ficr e

PiIt 0 ct'rIntl. lai l by our lord's tie.,r li!; !

\V'h;cl h tri' \(... ,,,k h. 1. I t' ca r, did nte'er iti iil;
And b)y \our t i Idren's \c lli: ce, spare mny age
Let not the i:,n e:,r mny aliciltt jo lts,
Ai id v

m iy lil I
ih , r: to tli grave with pinil.

Ladiy .r; . ',teIIIit fur thcl. : ti e n
tliH i y can-

not be;

For thef., I aIv: lie lledtafl to the tru!h;
Dt'L-l.t d t'a;!cloo.' is 1lt :l crltall d!c..:h.

[;. \ \ \ I ,v t'sh thei'; '.ant ar.td rt I ns ]

Pi if A l.i! I'm fore bcfet; let never man,

For fake ot lucre, fin againll his foul !
Eternal jullice is in this mo't jut !
I, guillcF now, niuql former guilt reveal.

Lan)' Ran. 0! A\s x hear !-cnce more Icharge

thee speak

The truth iiicd; for these to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narraticn ;
Wit:h v.hlich if the rcimnar:dr tallies not,
An inl-ant and a dtrcadul death abides thee.

rri'.: Thlen, thus an!'u'dj, I'll freak to you a.jul

/\s i' vcu w.tle t i':e iil;n!er ot he:ven,
bcnt vdow.n to Ita:c'i the lcerCt lir.s otf In n.

Soime IC 't:reln v\nrs ago. 1 tenced land

()I bravc ~:r M 1\1 CJI.I, tl-en BAIl tRLu'a !ot d;
;uit f:;ilmn to de, iv. hi: l r-

1 v:'s :e z/.'

.Al ti.,t; I ;, -.-r.J hen tu;Ur:;d t:1e a!'l mine,
,ri jur!l,:- %

: .'- :d :,.":it w: i,, g iitiloJ

r out ! : .:nd ":> im Wvee hGe rI r I

t)( to '.Ce ril.t v .)t t e tvwcr v.

iii..v

\ li:'Ce IIhoVl I · :i.e li,tei' ', i
Receiv 'J :s. th'e !] i .i,,ur. : th! i;..ll
I'i tili:ig, v.'!i li' h

. 's tlJi; :.cv l,' l;".)o r

tippon.'e.i lilt'. \\ !,..:. tl.i:, .r ,: *,;',

v lV;'d,

O()rI lioriv nit':'. as I It ' : t

i,

'lihe v.:i:)d ard al b"in t hl l ' ,i; .t>;i i," :
Redl c:;le rhecr dIr r. l, , i i i.d tt
'hlic an.:v :p Iir )t 'i v.'t.: 'r l < .i.
,.; the id.d lhei : jl i. t,: . .. 1h. c i '.ire ci

0s

Of one in jeopardy. I role, and ran
To wheir the ciicling ediy of a pool
liiLnct l the Ibrd, u>'d o!r to biing wiirhi:
>!. reach whatever floating thing the fire-ci

nad caiught . 'Ihe voice was ce!.s'd; thie person loft:

But looking fad and ea:t-nll oi the war rs.
13' the i:ool'. li ,ht I f.w ; whiri'd round and round,
A halket: Io)on I drew it to the bank,
And nelled curious there an infant lay,

L1,1v Rai. Was he a!ive ?
Pi/ lie was.
Ladly Ran. Inhuman that thou art!
How couldtt thau kil! what waves and tempests spar'd ?

Pril. 1 am not lo inhunian.
Lady Ran. Didll thou not?
Anna. MY noble tiiite, I, you are mov'd too much:

This mani has not the alpect ot Itern murder
L.rt him go on, and you. I hope will hear
Good tidings of your kinfin.n's long loll child.

Prif. 'he needy mian, who has known better days,

One whom diflrets has fprted at the world,
Is he whom tempting liends would pitch upon
'o do lilch deeds, as niake the prolperous men
.il't up their hands and wonder who could do them.
Andl such a man wa.1 I; a man declin'd,
Who fiw no end ot'bl'ck adversity:
Vt'r, for the wealth ol kingdoms, I would not
IIo c touch'd that iniannr, with a hand of harm.

Lnai'v Ran lt I1 doll thou I:ry i) ? Then perhaps

he lives !

P,I i Not nany dvas ago lie was alive.
Lalv Ran. 0! God ol heav'n ! Did he then die

'In It'ely ?

I',i/ I did not t'y lie died ; I hope lie lives

N'it many days ago thele eyes hcihcld
liiii, tloui illhin in voutil, and health, and beauty.

1..lv R'.1,. \\ here is lie now ?
1',i. :\Al. ! I know not . here.
Lady RH,, O(h t'.c ! I l1ca thee llill. Thou rid-

Icr, Ipc.I c
DireC anid clear; elle I1 will facrch tly foul.

lAnna. 'crni,t uni, c cr honour d ! Keen impatience,

C 4 Tho

Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself-
Pursue thiflory with a faithful tongue,
To the lefi hour that thou didft keep the child.

Prif. ISar not my faith, tho' I must speak my fliame.

Within the c-adle, where the infant lay,
Wras ftow'd a mighty flore ofgold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might ma k the change of our estate,
\We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Rought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our i;cret wealth. Bu: God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and fmore us fore
Jor one by one all our own children died,
And he, the stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Alean while the Itripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And r.ight and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set inyfelf against his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a defp-rate band
Of robbe;s s.on) the savage mountains came-

Lady Ran Etci n:al providence ! What is thy nme?
friif. M n m is NORVAL ; and my nam e hebears.
Lady R.n. ' 'is he ; 'tis he hiln'clf ! It is my son !

O sovereign merc) ! ' iwas my child I fiw !
No v.onde-, AN N ., that my bofoli burn'd.

.!nna .luf are your tranlport : ne'er was wo:ran'a

ica! t

Prov'd with such fierce extreme.. Hiili fated damc !
hlut yet remember that von arie beheld
'v; servile eye;; your gcitu:es may be seen
lnipalli'on'd. tirange; perilapS your words o'er leard.

Lady Ran. \ell dalt thou :ounfl, AN N ^: lHeaven

bellow On

On me tiht wifdout which my state requires!

.nna. 'Ilhe nmoennr of deliberation pass,

An. toon you nmutl relblve. This useful man
Mutl be uilniijMi' in safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave delivercr return.

Pri. I t I, anlidfl afonilhiment and fear,

Have of your words and gefure rightly judg'd,
'I'hou ait the daughter of 'mv ancient mailer;
'The child I refcu'd frolm the flood is thine.

Lady Ran With thee dissimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir MALCOLM ;
The child thou rclcu'd(t from the flood is mine.

P'i. Blest be the hour that made me a poor man!
My poverty hath fav'd my master's house !

Lady Ran. Thy words fuprize me : sure thou dost

not feign:

The tear tlands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir MALCOLM'S house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou toldft the (lory of thy own diflrefs.

Pri. Sir MALCOLM of our barons was the flower;

The faRel friend, the bes and kindest master.
But ah ! he knew not of my fad estate.
After that battle, where his gallant son,
'Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew defperatc and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
lly them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my nafer !
And God so love me as I love ias race !

Lady Ran. His flali yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd maftcr's house.
1Rei ilerb're1t thou a I'ttle lonely hur,
1 hat like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cliftt of Carronl

Pri. I remember
IThe cottage of tile cli!ts.

Lady Ran " 'is tilat I m-an:

'I lherc dwells a imanl f venerable age,
\Vho in my father's lervice fpcmn his youth:
'ell him I sent thee, and with himi rcimaii,

"Fill

# SCENE III.

"'i.l ' (Ir'l c!t; u;1 .. ';ec tO deC !.Ire,
I · or t',,c ;.i n an: d i:Jbles xwhat t!lou now

'1' :. h .:1 r.) d. No nore bur th;s, and tho:

s4 i: J1; Ie i.i hon,: ur all rlti' ft ture diajs;
'1' . ! .. ' ) l: ;~ fh il .ll
ca l tle'.' talher Il il,

.; :ili t',c ia:.1 haill bicl; tile ' inan, wlho :v',\ l

'':i: ' ,)t lt'G, ..\S, a;;ti Sir M .l. ICOLM'i heir.
Rc,:l.'. . itr v.'11 inv Lv,, r' ; : i l' t hou ihould l

t lmeet

II. ii 'v'Lil tlhou cai,'.l thy ion, ft:ll call iin l o,
A'!l( 'ilnto 1 notli;l: of l:s nolcir tnt;1,r.

i' i. Fear not thar I lhall imair to 'i.r an iarvcti,

By put ing in my lickl. ere ts lipe.
\\'bh d;id lave Imy home and ancient (dame ?
'i o tind. the youth, to tell himn all I knew,
Anid 1ake hinm wear tl:heiC jewe!s in his arns;
\\ lic!h n;ighr, I thought, be challeng'd, and lo brrng
To light the feciet-otf is noble bitt

[La,'y RA NDO LP goes to'w rIs the Scr'vant.

Lady Ran. 'This man is not the aflaffin you fulpted,

Tho' chance conbin'd some likelihoods againit him.
SHe is the thithlul bearer of the jewels
'IT their right owner, whom inl halle he seeks.
'Iis In t thlat you Ihould put himn on his way,
Si;,ce your imill.ken zeal hath dragg'd him thither.

[Exeunt Stranger and ServantJ.

S C E N E III.

Laiy R \ n o ,

L H anl AN N A.

I ..i v R m, iv a ithil AN N A !dotl thou Ihare myjoy?
I knowv ilou dolt. Unparallel'd event!
Rc.ic lih l Iomi hean ven to carthl, Ic'lovah's arm
n1 irch'd fti-o the wNiVe', and liinr;s to mIe my Ion !
I. ,!c it th!e vwidow; aind the orph!ln's tather !
A p' a \wifow'; r:1d a uinother's tlhanks
1", ::.ii t ,iir! \\ hat does iny A\Yc.' think

!' 1

rm. ',,;ig, c.ilI.lt i)la Xi a.11.1i t elil ?

''..' .))11 i',c ga3'.'.1 on biight andI l:turning aImi,
s, u.'! rth" l' : tlu:i h'l v.'lit'sc uis late. had thrt wn

!,;.1n,
.,ll I *o\ l'l up to I'bC rcvgi)on of his firt.

.'!,i:. 'i:\\ ;.,oilv, id )'our (ves divotr the boy!
\;ii c.'JIu. I..c1r, , 'h li the unlrj.'n curd Of

Of powvcrful inilficl, d ew 'ou to your own.

Lady Ran. 'lhe r,,ady flluy oif Is birth belice'd

Supprcfft y,) fi:rcyv uire; nor did lle owe
''o a:y lik ins I' )

mi to ltdden ;avoiur:

But now I long o Ice his face 1 ..,in,
Exuaine c c! v Cfcaruie, anld tird out
'1 he linlle:lli;rts o Do ct GL \ S, or Ily)' Ow1.
Bitr iJll of all, 1 Ioni to !it h'1. nII'
W\'ho hi, tiue parents ale, t cl'pa !his nec!:,
And tell hii all the flory ot Ihs lather.

Anna. \\';tr wary caurion v<iu i.uft beir yourfelt

In pui',ic, le'. your 'enr.crines b eak forth,
And in obtervc s itir conjcO.eues itrange.
For, if a cherub in the shape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
I.ike a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron flarted at your tears
Lady Ran. He did so, AN N A ! well thy mistress knows,
It' the leait circumltance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
\Vith jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me initant to declare
The birth of DU G LAS, and assert his right.
This night I purpolce with my son to rnler,
Reveal the secret and conlult v ith him:
For wile he is, or iny fond judgment ers.
As he does now, to luck'd his nob'e fathr,
A\rrxa'd in i,3:u:c's ca: hi hi c, s i'c' ch,
WVcre fwceiy fiiilc, and fuil oft c. -'v ,
' 'holt: tlivial miot tal s w!iho I;(t alwayis wii.
But, whcr' tliec in.'tCi riatci'd his mighly ::!,
L'prit' th!e hce: on hlis pi,.c'cg esc
Si.t ()lilcl, .ti'm; on c.ich g! aiIC i;'

: ..ou.:t
i).csi )m ';il,,..1 , a ;:.e huutm;c, `..:

II'llc'u l t . !1 '1.
',!na. | |l 1: ,l,.l,,':' ix:,Uu's vGu l.;'

:l;l)!l (3G r ; xt v a>,;.

I ..'v A1.', N o).' 1l

;I 'n ll i . n f.r.

T1hi, t.i ijl .) ' v'.! ', *i ia lh. a t'

' -, ",, , * :

,:

I'-ti ,~;, :,:, I'll: ;.' [ctl\ 111' .icc'. 1 i.'.'
- i D , \,t thuis i:1c:':ec:

Enter GLENALVON.

(i/ 1,Noble daie !

'he Iiov'rig Dane at ]aft his men hath landed:
No b:nd of I'irats ; but amighty host,
l'hat coie to fettle where their valour conquers;
' o win a country, or to lose thenilelves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligence,

(;.ENALVON ?

CGkl. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
lnform'd me, as he padt, that the fierce Dane
Had on the ealtern coast of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing Bals, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then mufl this weflern army march to

join :
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

Glen. Beyond all quefton. If impairing time

Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
Which lyes to the westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water wafted armies, whose chief Rrength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial fill direcs the danilh lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our swift cow'ring hoife, the bloody field
Mull man to man, and fi,ot to foot, be fought.
Lady Ran. How many mothers flall bewail their Cons!
-How many widows weep their hulbands (lain !
Ye dames of Denmark ! cv'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat Ihorc,
Long look for lords that never flall return.

(G!i O't has t'' unconquer'd Caledonian sword

\Vid(Iw'd the north. The children ot the slain
(Conir a. 1 hope, to meet their father's fate.
''hic i i:flcr war, ith hcr infernal brood,
Loud yelling fu:', nnd life ending pain,
IAre ubjc.i iited to GI.E N.I.VON. Aos ul.
S;oin is more grievous than the pains of death
Reproach, more pe,.ci;lg than the pointed sword.

La3y Ran I lIorn thee r:ot, bu! when I ought to

1.- ::,;, Nor

Nor e'er rcproac,,, hut when inlu!ted v:ituc
Against audacious xic2 al erts herself.
I own thy worth, GI.E. : \LVON ; nor c more apt
Than I to praise thir e lniinnlce in ai is,
And be the echo of th, mattial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pl:don:
Go and purlue a lawful n:lreils. g!o;v.
Upon the Danifi crests rei:(,ni thy ittulr,
And 'et thv valour be ti th ield of RA N nDOr n.

Glen. One instant stay, and hear an altl'd .I:a I.

When beau-y pleads for viFtue, vice abafh'd
Flies it's own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time wll 11 hew ho' truly:
Yet one immediate ptoof 1 mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zcal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defg'd you; ilave,
Amidst the (hock of anrties I'll defend,
And turn death from hinl, with a guardian arit.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field,

Lady Ran. Act thus, GLEN. LvoN, and I am th1

fiend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe n.e, fir,
The truely generous is the trucly wife;
And he who loves not others. lives unhlelR.

[Exit Lad.ny RA no L rt.

Glen [I'olu ] Amen ! and vii tue is its own reward '-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which (he loves to ipeak. -H ney'd affenr,
How pleasing art thou to the taie of man,
And woman also ! faittery diret
Rarely difgulis. They little know mankind
Who doubt it's operation · 'tis mv key,
And opCe the wiket of the humnan heart.
How lar 1 have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her flormy viitue
Is lull'd awhile: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilll (he and R.\NDOLrn live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertai,. is mv tenure.
Fate o'er my head lufpends dilgiace and death,
By that weak hair, a pcevi'h tfema!c's will.
1 am not idle: but the ebbs aniu flows

Of

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

01' f' u:iL's ride cannot be ca'; U!:'^d.
'I hl t fi::vc o' No V A L'S 1 h:i:ve to;uiid niofl apt:
I flne' d hiln gId, 'nd he hins pn.'ii'd his loul
'a o oy an2i l,.rar wharewver I fugr:;eir.
N ;:'.Vt A r, ':ii told. h:it ti;at llutring look,
'i v, ixr l:, and woiran, which I have obferv'd
'i'o charm the nicer and fanrafftck d.ames,

1'1ho n:e, like lady RAN DO LPI, filll of virtue.
I, ra!i. :i RBA.NDo LrH'S jealousy, ] may
Imu pjilir hilm to the truth. He leldom errs
\Vho thinks the worst he can o' womanikintl.

A C T IV. S C E N E I.

FlouriJ7l cff Trumpets.

Enter Lord RA NDOLPH attended.
I ord Ran. SUmmon an hundred horse, by break of

day,
To wait our pleasure at the caitle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
I.ady Ran. Alas ! may lord ! I've heard unwelcome

News;
The Danes are landed.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No 'portive war, no tournament eflay,
Of obnme young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And fl ain with hostile blood- his maiden arms.
The Dancs are landed: we mutl beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady Ran Dreadful times!
Lord Ran. The fence!efs villages are all forfilkcen

The trembling mothers, and their children lotdg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.
Lady Ran. Imnenfe, as fame reports, the Danish host !
Lord Ran. Were it as nuni'rous as loud fame report,

An

An army knit like ours v:or'd picrce ir r!inl'
Brothers, that fhink nor iromn each or;;r:; l;.!c,
And fond companrionr., fill our warlike firs,:
For his dear off-pring, and the v:ise: he loves,
The hulband the fearless father a:rn.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardor hums,
Acd the poor pealant mates his daiing l.'i.

Lady Ran. Men's minsds are tempellp , ilke their

swords for war:

Lovers of danger, on def:h'ti -n';s brink
They joy .o rear c're theli i: d:il: g formns.
Hence, early grave ; hrenc- the lone '.. io'xs li:'e
And the fad mothe,'s griel-einbittei'd age
Where is our gallant guest ?

LordRan. Dowr. n tl:e vale

I left him, managing a sie:y steed,
Whose ftubbornrnei had toiil' the lft(rcngil and flCli
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
]nr earnet: conversation with GtCLE X ALVO 'I.

Fnter No A L and G 1. rA NxLVO N.

GLEXALVON ! with the lark ;irilc; go fbrth,

And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
No RVAL, thou goefl vxith mc. But fay, young man,
\Where didft thou learn to to d;lnou:! f olt tr,
And in such tcrnms, as I o'crh!ard to d iy ?
War is no viilage science, nor it's phrase
A language thaught among the ficphcrd ikvair.

Naor Sna.l is the skill my lord delighrt to praise

In him. he tavours.-Hear fioni whence it calme.
Bleneath a mountain's brow, the nicft iemote-
And inaccellfible by (hepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no.mortal hand,
A lierait liv'd ; a melancholy m..n,
Who was the wonder of our v:and'ing swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to him!eif,
Did they report hiil; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, h:s food the fliepherds alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart wvas tonch'd
With reverence and p.ty. iild he fpuke,
And, entring on dilco.::te, such itories toid
As nmade me oft rcvifiL his fad cell,

For

F.r i:e had been a foldicr in his vouth;
Ad.l fought in f.mclus har'l!e. * hen the peers
Of Europe, hv the bold Go I) F o led,
Again!! th' uiLtping rInidel dilplay'd
'File cro!s ot'Chrilt, and won the Hulv land.
Pltas'd with my admiration, and the fire
H{is speech struck from Ine, the old mana wnu'd Ihake
H;s years away, and a6t his young encouners:
Then, having liew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all tile live-long day discourse of war.
'I'o help my fancy, in the linooth green turf
He cut the figures of the mirfhall'd holts;
Defcrib'dthe motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The Iquare, the crelcent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Christian knew
Of war's vail art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran Why did this i,'dier in a defart hide
Those qualities, that shou'd have grac'd a camp ?

'or'v. That too at ift I learn'd. Unhappy man I

Returning homewards by NlMffina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boifl'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The itranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God
The soldier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother!

Lady Ran. His brother!
'orv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

Hiis only brother. They exchang'd forgivenefis
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffcr'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on tome nalnelefs tream's untrodden baaks,
And ruminates all day hii dreadful fate.
At riines, alas ! not in his perfect mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brothet's ghoR ;
And of each night forsakes his fillen cou.h,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady. Ran. To what myftcrious woes are mortals

In this dire tragedy were there no rore [born !
Unhappy perlonm did the parents live ?

Norv.

Norv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had

clos'd their eyes
Before their son had lhed his brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame !

There is a destiny in this strange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom!
Let fchoolmen tell us why.--From whence thefefounds?

[Trumpets at a difiance I

Enter ,n OFFICER.

Officer. MyLord, the trumpets of the troopsof Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RN DO L PH.

Lord Ran. line ancient guest! does he the warniors

lead?

las Denmaik rous'd the brave old knight to arms?
Officer. No; worn with warfare, he refignsthe V:.-ord.

Iis eldefi hope, the valiant John of Loin,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran GLENALVON, go,

With h6opitality's minot ftron requcet
En:reat the chief. [Exit GLENALVON ]

Officer. My lord, rcquefts are vain.

lie urges on, impatient of delay,
S:ung with the tidings of the foe's npproach.

Lord Ran May viao:y fit on the ,arrior's plume !

Bravell of men! his flocks and herd; are l.fc
Remtote froml war's alarms his pafu: es lye,
By mountains inacccffTble fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain deccen!s,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient koild ·
Contenmncs they of indolence and gain;
But ft 11 for love of g!or,, ai.d of arlls,
Prone to encounter peril, al,d to lift
Against cach (lrong antagoni.: the fprcr.
I'll go and p:ess the heio tu my L:caft.

[Exit P./.NDO:PII.]

Mllrtnt Lady R :; DO L r H and No R v A L

Lady Rjn. The fuldicr's lottinefi, the pride and ponip

Invcting awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Tranfpoit thy youthful nin4.

Norv. Ah! ihould they not?
lkctR be the hou: I left niy fathct' hi;ifc '

1D I .:;l.;

I migl:t have been a shepherd all mny days,
And tJole obscurely to a peafanr's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I !sand;
And, if [ fall, with noble dull I lye.

Lady Ran. There is a gen'tous lpirit in thy breafl,

That could have well liuftaill'd a prouder fortune.
This way with me ; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wonl'rous tale.

N'or.v. L.t there he danger, lady, with the lfecret,

That [ may hug it to miy g!atefuli heart,
And prove my faith, Coniiiand my lyord, my lile:
These are the sole pofl'efliolns of poor No !v A.\ .

Lady Ran. 'now'ft rhou thll'cc gems?
Yctrv., Dulft I belicve nine eves
I'd lav I k:newv !bill and rh'ez were my fathel 's.

Ladiy R'an. Thy :hatiel's 1a)'1t th)d ! ah ! they were

thy tlahei's !
.rr,,. i t.v therli once, and cu:'i(uile' enquir'd

(If both niy parenr:sa her.cce ;uch i'lelndor came ?
Bur I was checc'd. and nore could never learn.

Lady Ra;;n l;hen klarn o' nie thou a;: no: NoR v. AL'S:

I zn.

%'oc.-. Not NORV.LL'S On !
l.ad y Ran. Nor of a thephe.d ;p:ur.g.
Nor-'. Lady. who am; I n1en
Lady Rah. Noble tnou art;
For noble was thy ;ire!

NVr-v. I will'believe-
O! teli me farther ! Say, who was my father ?

Lady 'Ra . DoUG LAS !
Norv. l.ord DOUGL AS, whomt to dayJ law ?
Lady Ran. Hi' younger brother.
ror'v. And io yonder camp ?
Lady Ran. Alas !
MNrv. You lmake me trenmbic-Sighs and tears!'
Lives my brave lther ?

Ladv Ran. Ah ! too brave indeed !
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Nor-v. Ah me unhappy ! ere I saw the light ?

But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady

Lady Ran. She lives; but waftes her life in constant

woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

,ror,.v. You that are kl;ll'd so well in the fad ifory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compaflion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O 1 tell me who, and where my mother is !
Oppreft by a base world, peihaps the bend.
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid
Her ton flould give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confefles that Ihe's wretched.
0 ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword ---
Who shall relilt ntl in a parent's caui' ?

Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My ton, my

on '!
I anm thy mother. and the wife of DOUvCTAS !

[Falls uportn his neck.

NAorv. 0 heav'n and earth, ho.w wond'rous is ny fate
Art thou mliy mother! Ever let me kneel !

Lady Ran Image of Do ! c,L. s ! fruit offatal love
All that I owe thy lire I pay to thee.

Ao, tv. Relpeit and ad::iration fiill poffc'fs me,,

Checking the love and fondnctl: of a ton.
Yet I was liiial to my humble parents.
But did lmy lire lurp;!'s the rel of ien.
As thou exceilcit all of wonnkinind ?

Lady lIan. Arire imy foil ! In me inl;u dust behold

The poor remains of beauty once admi-' :
Th e aultumn of my days i coie alre!:dy;
For sorrow inllde my su.i.nter haste aw.y.
Yet in Imy prime I eq.uall' not thy tather:
His eyes were like tie eagle's, yet lI.nctir.W.-
Liker the dove's, and a; he ple:ls'd, he won
All hearts with foefnel;, or wicit Ipirit .'.d.

Norv. How did he fall ? Sure 'twa; a bloody fieldc
When DoUGLA died. 0.1 have Ilmuilchi alk !

Lady Ra,. Hereatier thou hlalt hcar the lengrheu'd:

ta!e

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At prefent.this 'Thlou art tile rilh:tful heir

D 2 Of

Of yonjcr caltle, and the wide do:naiins
\Vhi; i now Lord RA. x D o L, ii, as ltmy husband, holds.
But thou fitlc not now be v:rong'd ; I have the power
To v, rite thee flill: Feforer tre Lig I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGL..AS to proted his blood.

NorvJ. Thle blood of Dote LAS wil protect itself.
Lady Ran. Ilut v.e /hall need both f;icnds and ta-

vour bov.

To vrefl thy la.i'. and !,)d lhip from the g;;pc
)f RA. N DI. P and his kinfilan. Yet 1 t:Ii.!k
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
Mvs life incline the virtucus to h.l:eve.

N'ort. To be the son of D tr

-. A is to me

Il:herita ce cnicuhli. Dc'are tiIv bilih,
A\d ii the fiidl I'i fe-ck for l.aime and fortune.

Lady Ran. Thou dost not know what perils and

injuRtice

Await the poor ni.ii's valour. 0 ' my fn
'The noblefl blcod in all the nla:r.' abalh'd.
1-iaing no lacqtavy lut pale Iovertv.
''oo long hba' thou been thus at:ended DOUGLAS !
'I'oo long haft thou been cceie'd a peasant's child.
'The wanton l:ir of' fom inglorious chief
'erhaps ha: fcorn'd thee, in the vcuthful sports;
MU hill thy ird'gnar.t spirit fweli'd in vain!
Sukh co:'.tuilcli thou no inore Ihat bear:
But how. I pu:po.e to r.drcfs ltiy wrongs
Mutl be hereafter told. Pudeilce diretts
That we Pirauld part before yon chiecfs rtturn.
l.eti.c, ra:d fromi thy ru!tick fullower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to ;ee thee, dictatcd before
'1 his casual oppoirunity arore
Of private confciencc. It's purport make;
'or at 1 tliere appoint we nicet again.
lcavc nme, my son ! and frame thy manners till
To NOR AL'S, lct to noble DOUtLAS slate

/'N 1 \ iil remember. WXhere is No VAL now ?
That good old man.

Lady Ran. At hand conceal'd he lies,

An ufclul wi ness. But bewa:c, my son,
Of yon GLE N.LV N ; in hi gui'lrv breala

Rcfi cs

Rctfi.ci a vill.'n's ,.rc.vdnefs, ever prone
'ITo sale conijecture. He hath grieV'.l my heart.

A\'.--r. las he indeed ? Then le: yo.i fallc GLE-

N A I. V ON
Beware of m . Ex:t DJc L..S.

AManet I.advy RAN 1) P I.

Lady Ran. 'lheic bu;st the illnithr'd flame I

0 ! thou all righteoV- and etern:l King !
Who tather of the ftllherlcfs art calid,
Protet my son !--Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath hli'd his boffiom with that lacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forelathers burn'd:
Set him on hieh like then,, that he may Ihine
'The flar arn glory of his native land !
Then let the minitler of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to it's place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpeEs to conceal their guilt
When I by reason, znd by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can diffenible with thele men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPHI andGLENALvoN.

I.ord Ran. Yon gallant chief,
Of armos enaniour'd, all repose disclaims.

I.ady Ran. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:

Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And when you ente., speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDULPt.

ilantnt Lord RANDOLPH1 andGLENALVON.
Lord Ran. ' ris so by heav'n ! her mien, her voice,

her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Gltn. He parted from her now . Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along

Lord Ran. tor fad fequefler'd virtue she's renown'd
Glen lMol true, my Lord.
Lo d Ran. Yet this diltinguilh'd dame

Invites, a youth, the acquaintance ora day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This assignation, (jsbeus a letter.) the aflaflin freed,
Ier manifest affcion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in ia hufband'g brain,

Whlofc

\W olifc enwle conti)rt all for love had wedded:
Mluch more ii mliie. MT TI. o never lov'd mne_
Let rno man, n:'er me, a woman wed,
Whote iheart he knows he has not; tho' (he brings
A iline of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her I'ein, like the night's lhadowy queen,
Cold and conteniplative ;--He cannot tiull her:
She niav. the will, bring lha!ne and torrow on liin;
The worit of sorrow, and the worfl of thaies !

Gte,. Yield nor, my Lord, to fuch'afflirting thoughts;

But let the Ipirit of an husband sleep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion,
This billet nmult to blooming No RVALL go:
At the next turn awaits my tru ly Ipy;
I'll give it him refitted for his master.
fn the clot! rhicket take your ifcret stand;
IThe noon flines brigll, and your own eyes nqay judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dost counsel well.
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight efTiy.

Of all the trophies which vain mortal's boait,
By wit, by valour, or by wifdoin won,
The first and faireti, in a young maln s eye,
Is wonman's captive heart. Succefslul love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind ;.
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves.
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And whpt evails this maxim ?i
Glen. Much, my lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accc;it young No Rva r.,.
And with ironical derisive counsel
Erplore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVALr., by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as lie is, he'll shrink altonih'd fro hiue:.
But if he be the fav.ourite of the fair,
--Lov'dby the 6rft ofCaledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear

Lord Ran. 'Tis shrewdly thought..
| Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But lel

my Lord
His cooling ,.rath restrain. Exit RANDOLPH.

'' ' D~~ln/isi

'Mianet GLEN A .VON.

Gi!e 'Tis ilrange by heav'n !

That lihe hlould run lull tilt her fond career,
1'o one lo little known. She too that fieii'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice cmilol,'d
WVhirens it's courle. Even I did think her cLafle,
Whol;e charirv exce-ds not. Prec'cr;ls 'x !
'Whote deeds l:l'civ ious pals G L:. N . LV o ;N'S thoughts I

Noiv AL oppears

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at hlin it roar'd..
Hlas NOt VAL seen the troops ?

a%'orw'. 'Th.e letting fun,.

With yellow radiance lightlc'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm,.
CtnrCet, or fper, gl..nc'd back his gilded beamss
'rhe hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
Of more than muortal size, tow'ring, they seene'd,
An holt angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'ft it well ; no leader of our holt,

In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.
* NVo,-v. If I fhail e'er acquire a leader's name,
My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itfc't freely ; since no part is mine.
Otfpraife, pertaining to the great in arms. [deed,;

Glen. You wrong yourfelf,,brave fir; your nartial

HIave rank'dyouwith the great: but mark me,No iv x -.
I..ord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service..
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you..
Give thenl all honour; seem not to. command;
Elle they will scarcely brook your late fprdng power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Norlv. Sir,, have been accustom d all my days

To hear and' speak the plain and.funple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their feorn,
Yet in such language I am little tkill'd.
Therefore I thank GL£;;.LVON for his counsel,
.Altho' it founded harlhly. Why remind
Me of my' birth obicure ? Why slur. my power.

Withx

V'ith fuhc contemptuous terms ?

G/en I didi not miIan
To gall vyolr pride, which naw I fee is great.

Aorr N !h pride !
Glen. Suppiefi it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride's excf'live. Yet for RANDOLPH'S fake
I will nor leave you to i:'s ralh direction.
If thus you ltv.'il, and frown at high-born men,
\Vill high born men endure a Ihephcrd's scorn!

Nwrv. A shepherd's scorn !
Glen. Yes; if you presume

To bend on soldiers there disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in fecrer, you're no match for me;
What will become of you ?

Nsrv. If this were told !- [.file.
1iaft thou no fears for thy piefuinptuous self !

Glen. Ha ! Dost thou threaten me
]Aorv. Didft thou not heilr ?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But flch as thee--

Nerv. Whom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
Norv. So I am--
And who is NoRVA L in GLENALVO 'S eyes ?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

No'rv. False as thou art, dost thou fufpeEt my truth ?
Glen. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lye; and falle as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'tt to RANDOLPJ.

Nforv. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I should revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NORVAL
Is of a race, who strive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to fieeze thy Ihallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Dost thou not know GLENALVO , born to.

command
Ten thousand slaves like thee ?

Norv. Villain, no more:
Draw and defend thy life, I did design

Tw

To have defy'd thee in anothier cause:
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RA N DOL I u' wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOI. IH.

Lord Ran. Hold, I command you both. The man
Makes me his foe. [that flirs

Norv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble R X N no t. p t.

Glen. Hear him, my Lord ; he's wonderous coalde-
Mark the hunlili:y of shepherd NORVAL! [fendeng!

Nor,. Now you mlay scoff in safety. (Sheaths bis
Loid Ran. Speak not thus. f-lord.)

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

ANorv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blulh to speak ; I will not, cannot speak
Th'opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
J owe a fubjet's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd rej&t.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPHx,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

Lord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land [voice:
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted field's.
Suspend your purpole,'till your country's anus
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Norv. And I.

Enter SERVANT.

Serv. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RANDOLPH.
Glen. NoRVAL.

Let not our variance mat the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of R^N DO LPr.
Nor trowning anger, nor yet wiinkled hate,
Shall fain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;

E Nor

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Nc let our itrife diflurb bhe gentle dame.

Aor-v. Think, not to lightly, Sir. of my refentnmnt:
Wher, we contend again our trile is mortal.

ACT V. SCENE I.

The 'oold.

Enter DOUGLAS.
T HIS is the place the center of the grove,

Here Itands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this mid-night scene!
The ilver moon, unclouded holds her way
Thro' ikies where I could count each little flar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river rulhing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly found.
In tuch a place as this at luch an hour,
Ifanceftry cam be in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NoRVAL.
Old Norv. 'Tis he. But what if he ihould chide

me hence ?
His jut reproach Ifear. [Do UG LAS turns andfees bim.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'it thou forgive the man, the lelfiih man,
Who bred Sir MALCOL.M's heir a Ihepherd's ton.

Doug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father till:

Thy wish'd for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou {halt (hare,
And ever honour'd with thy Dou GLAS live.

Old No, v. And do'st thou call me father ? O my son !

I thirnk that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness to long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worle the fruit,

That in the wilderncfs the bloirom blow'd.
Amongfl the lheplihds in the humble cote,

I learn'd

I learn'd fo.':I lefl,' s, whi:h I'il not fc'-et
When I inuabit yondPr lofty towers.
I, who was once a 5.vain, will ever prove
The poor man's s-ied d; and, when my vaTals bow,
NoRVAL shall fnimoothth cre .. pride of DOUGLAS.

Norv. Let me but li .c to fee thine cxa!ration !

Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Doug. Why should I leave them?
Norsv. Lbrd Rn N DO L pH and his kinsman seek your life

Doug. How know'ft thou that?
lorv. I will inform you how.

When evening cmnie, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mothei's care,
And fondly trod in each accutlomed path
'rhat to the castle leads. Whilfl thus I rang'd,
I was alarnn'd with unexpected founds,
Of earnelt voices. On the peifons came:
UnfeenI lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON : fill of you they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their fpecch,
'rho' but imperlecly my car could hear it.
'I'was Itrange, they laid, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Revenge! for what?
Niors. For being what you are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: h9w else have you offended
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat muling how I best might find
Mleans to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I ifued forth, incompanifng the tower
With many a weary tiep and williful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Lect not your too courageous spirit Icorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd ne of GLEN LV

0 ON'S bafencG:

But 1 will not fufpea the noble RAN DoLPI1.
In our encounter with the vile afafafins,
1 mark'd his brave demeanour: im I'll trust.

IE :. ,'ot-v.

NoTrv. I fear you will too far.
Doug. Here in this place

I wait my motEr'r coming: ihe fliall knorx
Wnat thou !:atl told: her counsel 1 will follow.
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
Yo:i niuft depart; your prelence may prevent
Our interview.

.NorZ'. My bleling reft upon thee!

O :aYv :i;av'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
Ar.d fire:a the fvord of foes, be near thee fill;
i urrl.llg nii:chance, it aught hangs o'er thy head,
All upsJn miine! [Exit Old NORVALA

Doug. He loves me like a parent,

And lmul not, fh.il not lose the son he loves,
Altho' h s fbo has frund a nobler father.
Eventful day; how haft thou chliag'd my flatel
Once or the cold, and winter shadcd fide
Ot'a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of may my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious itars I high heav'n's resplendent hofll
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my boul's unalter'd wish!
Dead or alive, let mle but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire omne fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bola defiance to our hol !
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPI.

Lady Ran. .ly soln.: I ieard a voice-
Doug-- -1 lRat voice was Inilne.
Lad Ran. Did'ft thoucoinplainaloud to nature's ear,

That thus in dully ihades, at mid-night hours,
By stealth the niother and the soln liould meet ?

[Embracing hin.

Dsug. No on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My tiouglhts and words itre all of hope r.nd joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fuar and melancholy itill divide

The empire of my breaf with hope and joy.
Now hlear what I advise.

Doug. Firit, let i:;e tell

What

What nmy the tenor of your counsel change.

lady Ran. Mvy heart forebodes some evil!
Deug. 'Tis not good----

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'er-heard
Their convcrfation oft they nimntion'd me
With dreadful threatnings; you they sometimes nam'd.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady Ran. Defenid us, graciousGod ! we are betray'd:
They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It mull be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own;
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou feep'ft.
'his inmient, this, heav'n hath ordaiiid to save thee!
Fly to the camp, my Ion I

Do:ug. And leave you here?

No : to the castle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants ot your house,
Who in their youth did eat your ifaher's bread.
Then tell them loudly that i am your son.
Ir in the brealts of men one spark remiains
Of sacrcd love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your caultf will ari. I alk hbt few
To drive those I'pilcrs froml mv lather's house.

Lady. Ran. 0 naru.e, na:ure! what can check

thy force ?

Thou genuine offspring of the daring Douc LAS
But rulh not on deftfuctio:i: lave thyflcf,
And I am safe. To enc they mean no harm.
'Ihy flay lut rilks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path condlutdl rlce to the river.
Cross where thou Icell a bioad and beaten way
Which running eastward luads thee to the camp.
Instant demand admittance to Lord Do u LA

s .

Shew him these jewels, which his brother v. ore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel thy trutl,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Doug. I yield me and obey: but yet nly heart
Bleeds at this parting. Something bids iUe flay

L 3 \jnd

And guard a mother's life. Oi't have I re.d
Of wo!,d'rous deeds by one bold arm stchu'v'd.
Our foes are two; no mnore: let mle go forth,
And fee if anv ihield can g-<ard G L ENA . ON,

Lady Ran It thou regard'Tl thy mother or rcvcr'f

Thy thther's men'ry, think of-this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
I.ong wert thou loll: and thou art found, my child,
In a mont fearful fealtn. War and battle
I have great cause to dread Too well I fee
Which way the current o!- thy temper sets:
To day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loll hope!
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein.
To morrow I nmay lose nmy Ton for ever.
The love of tee, le`ore thxou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my lite when thy brave father fell.
If thou imilt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this wafle wvorld ! my son, remember mI !

D:ug. What lhall I fy ? how can 1 give you consort
The God of battles of my life dilpofe
As may be befl for you ! for whole dear fake
I will not bear niyfelfas I refolv'd.
Put yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boatl founds amongR martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The pofl of fate unlhrinkl; g I maintain.
Ms ccintiry's foes miuit wituels who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes conlfeci tlie genuine firain.
If in this trrife I fall, blame not )our son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, muff not live.

Lady Ran I will not utter what my bofoin feells

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

[Embracing
And as high heaven hath will'd it all must be. [feperates.

Lady Ran. Gaze not on mle, tbau wilt mistake

the path;
I'll point it out again.

[7uft as they are separating, nter from te 'wood

Lerd RAN DOLPH and GLM.J.;L ALvqN.]

Iord Ran. Not in het preie.nc.
Now- C'-*.

Glen. I'L prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I commind ttlee tlay.

I go alone: it never Ih.;!l be fai.l
That I took odds to cotublt man tal man.
Thie noblefr vengeance is the iii.tt conipleat.

[Exit L.n d RAN DOLPI ]
[GLE .LVON makes some lcps ti the /lm./ fie of the

Jtige, lilens andl Ipr.iks]

Glen Demons of death come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the hufhand both imuft die.

[Lord RANDOLP H behind thbfcenes.]

Lord Ran. Draw, Villain ! draw.
Daug. Alsai! me not, Lord RAN DOLPH ;
Not as thou lov'ft thy self. [Clajing of fvords.]

[GLENALVON running out.]

Now is the time.
Enter Lady . AN D o r P at the oparl'.te ide of the sage,

faint and breathleis.
Lady Ran. Lord RANDOLPH hear me, all shall be

thine own:
But lpare I O spare my son I

Enter Dou GLAS with af/wrd in each h'and

IMy mother's voice!
I can proteCt thee 0till.

Lady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise!
But sure I saw thee fall.

Doug. It was GLEPALVON.

lust as my arm had matler'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded !

O my child,
How pale thou look'ft ! and l(all I lose thee now ?

Doug. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not last. [Leans upon bis fvJ rd.]

Lady Ran. There is no hope !

And we must part ! the hand of death is on thee I
O iny beloved child I O DOUGLAs, DOUGLAS I

[Do v G L As groisn'n aore aln more faint.]
Doug. Too soon we part: 1 have not long been

DoUvLAS. 0 acfeiny

O deciny ! ha:dly thou deal'l with me:
Clouded and hid, a stranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.
Lady Ran. Has heav'n prelerv'd thee for an end like

this ?

Doug. 0 had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle !
Like them I should have fiil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand !
Cut off fionm nature's and from glory's course,
VWhich never mortal was so fond to run.
Lady Ran. IHar, justice! hear! are there the fruits

of virtue ? [DoUGLAS fall.
Daug. Unknown I die; no tongue Ihall speak of

me.---

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conj, ture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who fha'l comfort thee ?

l.ady Ran. Despair ! despair !
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my mother [Dies.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have

pierc'd my heart,

I am the stain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's fviord

Anna. Alas I look there, my lord,
Lord Ran. The mother and her son ! How curr I

am !

Was I the cause? No: I was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

Anna. My lady lives

The agony of grief hath but lupprea
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead !

The world did once esteem Lord RANDOLPH well,
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd.

Beneath

BHneatli the hly banner of the cross.
Ni, pall the noon of life, shameu comes upon me;
ceproach, and iniainy, and public hire,
Arc near at hand: for all mankind wili think
That iRA DoLrtP basely tab'd Sir MIALCOI.M'S heir.

[Ladv RAN DOLPH r,'co.verimg.
L.adv Ran. \Where am I now ? ltill in this wretched

wolld!

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
Mr youth was worn in anguish :but youth's flengtb,
\\'it hope's afliftance, bore the blunt of forTow
A.id train'd nie on to be the objett now,
On which omnipotence dilplays itlelt,
Mlakin; a fpecQacle, a tale of me,
To awe ii's vassal, man.

l.ord Ran. 0 mifely !

Amidst thy raging gtiet I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence!
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think't it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing ? My foil! my son !
My beautiful! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hulband's name:
Now all iuy hopes are dead! A little while
Was I a wite! a niother not so long !
What am I now - I know.- But I Ihall be
That only whillt I pleas:; tor such a son
And such a hulbanl mliake a woman bold. [Runs out.
Lord Ran. Follow her, '\A N A : I mryllf would follow,
But in this lage lilh nmuis abhor ly p;efenice.

[Exit A 1 A.

Enter 0Oi; No VA L.
Nor.. I heard the voice ot woe; heaiven guard my

child I

Lord Ran. Already is the idle gnpina c-oud,

The Ipitetul vulgar, colme to gaze oni RANDOLYII.
Begone. A'irv.

A'or- I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
W\ith thee in murder. Yes, my ins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 nobleftR outh that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and heft, gentlest and bravest fpiiit,
That ever blefl the world ! \rctch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above tie nanow limits that confin'd it!
Yet never was bv all thy virtues won
To do thee juffice, and reveal thy lccrct,
Which timeiy known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's fnnre. Oh ! I am punilh'd now !
'hefe are the hairs that hould have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS.

[Tears his hair, and throws him nfe uton the

ground.

Lord Ran. 1 know thee now: thy boldness Iforgive:

My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curst, curit GLEuaALVON, he elcap'd too well,
Tho' (lain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon dy'd.

Enter A N A.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord !
Lord Ran. Speak: J can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror indeed !
Lord Ran. MIIATILDA ?
Anna. Is no more:

She ran, (he flew like light'nina up the hill,
Nor halted till the prcipicr ihe gain'd,
Beneath whole low'iing top the tiver fa'r l
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thirher she came,
As fei'rlcfs as the eagle lightL upon it,
And heatl,,iri down

Lord Ra n. 'Twas I ! alas' 'twas I

That fill'd her Lrcalt with la'y ; drovc her dlown
''he p:ecipice of O.cath ! Wretch that 1 ain !

naa. 0 lhaid vou fecn her last despairing look!
VUon the brink Ihe flood, and calt her eyes

Djwr

Down on the deep: then lifring up her lhced
And her white hains to he:.l n, Ir..ning, toay,
Why am I forc'-d to this ? She plun ^'d hel Iitl
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complain:s, the pa:lion of my lfot!.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of R. N l)OL.P gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice ot tate
Denounce my doom. I am retllv'l. I'li go
Straight to the battle, where the n :n that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never thall return.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE.

EPILOGU E.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y.
A N Epilogue lasi'd; but not one 'word

Our bard uwill write. He 'vows'tis mofI absurd

sWith comic 'wit to contraditd the frain
Of tragedy, and make yourforrows vain.
Sadly he fays, that pity is the best,
The robhlft pafion of the humah breaf/ :
For when its sacred lreams the heart o'er-jow,
In gustes pleasure with the tide of woe ;
And when its waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden foil,
That there the 'irtues wvithout culture grow,
There the sweet blofoms of affeion blow.
Tbefi were bis words ;--oid of delufivf art
I fel them; for befloke them from his heart.
Nor will I now attempt, 'with witty filly,
Te chace away cl eflial melacholy.

,' ..1
(D·~~
