D O U G L A S:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is ACTED at the
T H E A T R E S

I N
GREAT-BRITAIN AND IRELAND.

Non ego fum vates, fed prifci confcius evi.
By the Rev. JOHN HIUME.

To which are prefixed,
I. An Address to the Author. By DaJid Hume, Efq;

Author of the Hillory of Great-Britain, &c.
II. Copy of an Admonition and Exhortation, by the

Rev. Presbytery of Edinburgh.
III. Copy of a Declaration by the Rev. Prefbyteiy of

Gla/lgo u.

C O R K E.
Printed by EUGENE S WINEY, near tie

Exchange, M,DCC,LXII.
VdA id, *, 2a

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HUME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

( 3)

^^^&^**^ItRx &t

t
An Address from DAVID HUME, Efq; Author of tbe

Ilijiory of Great-Britain, 6c. to the Rev. Mr.
Hu.M, Author of DOUGLAS, a 7Tagedy.

My dear Sir,

'r was tl-e PraAice ofthe Anients to address their
Cormpofitons only to Friends and Equals, and to
render their Dedications Monuments of Regard and

Affeltion, not of Servility and Flattery. In thole Days
oi ingenious and canJid Liberty, a Dedicarion did HIo-
nour to th1 Person t, whom it was addreliHd, without
tlegradling the Author. If any Partiality appeared tow-
ards the Patron, it was at lealt the Partiality of Friend-
Ihip and Afflction.

Another Intlance of true .iberty, of which antient

rimes can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
ot 'Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, however
di:icrent in their abtlraEt Opinions, to maintain a mu-
;ual Friendiflip and Regard; and never to quarrel about
I'rincip'es, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
inrs. Science was o'ten the Subje:t of Dilputation,
never of Animosity. Cicero, an Academic, addrelled
!;i, philufophical 1'reatiles, fometinme to Brutus, a Stoic;
lonc'times to '\tticus, an Epicurean.

I have b en 1-ized with a llrong Desire of renewing

tliele laudihll I'ractices of Antiqui; , by addtreling the
lo'lowing Dilrrtaliins to you, my good Frikn : For
Luchl I wi l ever ca'l and eleemi you, notwithilanding
the Oppofi:ion whlich prevails between us, ith Re-
.iard to mimny of our fpecularive Tenets. ''hetf Dif-
ierelncei of C'pinion 1 li:ve only found to enliven our
Converlttion; while our common PadTion for Science
and Letters lervcd as a Cemuient to our Frienidltip 1
Itill admired )our Genius, even when I iimained that
you lay; un Ier the Influence of Prejudice; and you
io.n:ilines tjld mn, that you cxculed my Errors, on

A 2 Accouut

(4)

Account of tile Candour and Sincerity, which you
thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is less my Admiration of your

fine Genius, which has engaged me to make this Ad-
dress to you, than my Esteem of your CharaEter and
my Affecion to your Person. That Generosity of
Mind which ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of
Friendlhip; that spirited Honour and Integrity, have
long intereled me lirongly in your Behal', and have
made me desirous, that a Monument of our mutual
Amity flould be publickly erected, and, if pollible, be
preserved to 'ollerity.

I own too, that I have the Ambition to be the firfl

who Ihall in public express his Admiration of your noble
Tragedy of Dotfelas; one of the moll interelting and
pathetic. Pieces, that was ever exhibited on any I heatre.
Should I give it the Preference to the Merope of MasSei,
and .to that of Voltaire, which it retembles in its subjet ;
fliould I affinm, that it contained more Fire and Spirit
than the former, more T ndernels and Simplicity than
the latter ; I might be accused of Partiality : And how
could I entirely acquit myself, after the Profellions of
Friendfllip which I have made you ? But the unfeign-
ed Tears which flowed from every E)e, in the nume-
rous Representations which were made of it on this
Theatre ; the unparalleled Command, which you ap-
peared to have.over every AffeEtion of the human
Brealt: These arc inconteltible proofs, that you poflels
the true theatric Genius of Shakefpcar and Otway, re-
lined from the unhappy arbarbilm of the one, and Li-
centioufnefs of the other.

My Enemies, you know, and I own even sometimes

nly Friends have reproached nme widt the love of para-
doxesand singular Opinions; and I expect to be cx-
pored to the inme Imputation, on Account of the Cha-
rEtcr, which I have here given of your Doun'Irs. I ihall
be told, no doubt, that I had artfully cl'of'.- the only
time, when this high Esteem of that Piece could be re-
garded as a Paradox, to wit, before its publication ; and
Ihat not being able to contradict in this Particular the
Sentiments of the Public, I have, at least, resolved to go
before them. But I shall be amply compenlated for all

thts;c

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Revd. Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January 1757.

( 5 )
(5)

tliefe Pleafantries, if you except this Teflimony of rry
Regard, and b lieve me to be, with the greatell Since-
rity, Dear Sir, Your inoft affectionate Friend, and hum-
ble Servant,

Edinb. Jan. 3, 1757. DAVID HuME.
C'oy of Ite Admonition ana Exho, tation ly the Revdl.

Prejlyite;y of Edinburgh, dated tle 5th Dy of Ja-
nuary 1757.
T H E Presbytery taking into their serious Confider-

ation, the declining State of leligion, the open

Profanation of the Lord's Day, the ( ontcmpt of public
Worfhtp, the growing Lu':ury and Ievitv oi the present
Age; in which ls many leem Lovers of Pleasure, more
tnan Lovers of God And being particularly aflTeted
with the unpreceented Countenance given or' late to the
I'la)lhoufe in this Place, when the State of the Nation,
and the Circumfiances of the Poor, make such hurtful
Entertainments flill more pernicious; judged it their in-
diilenfible Duty to exprels in the most open and solemn
Manner, the deep Concern they feel on this Occasion.

The Opinion vhich the Chrifian Church has always

entertained of Stage Plays and Players, as prejudicial to
the Interells of Religion and Morality, is well known ;
and the Ifaral Influence which they commonly have on
the far grrater Part of Mankind, particularly the younger
Sort, is too ob ious to be called in (2uellion.

'To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and

Students in different Branches of Literature, in the City
and Subuibs, have been i(duced from their proper Buli-
nels, by atrtnding the Stage, would be a paintul, difa-
grceahle 'Ilalk.

'Ilhe l'rethytery in thle Year 1727, when conrfifing of
'ainy pious, prudent, and learned Minitiers, whose

'raile i., in ail the lh lurches, bt;ng aware or tliee .Evils,
did pr.parc a rnper, wnici was tead froin the feversl

A 3 IPlipits

(6)

Pulpits within their Bounds, warning their People a-
gainft the dangerous Infection of the Theatre then eret-
ed there.

In the Year 1737, the Legislature, in their great

\WV'dom, did, by an A&t of the loth of George 11. en-
a5t and declare, " That every Person who should, for
"Hire or Reward, a&t, or cause to be atled, any Play,
' or other Entertainmtnt of the Stage, without the fpe-

cial Licence and Authority mentioned in the said At,
should be deemed a Rogue and a Vagabond, and for
every fiuch Offence lhould forfeit the Sum of 50 1.
' Sterling.

At that time a Projct was let cn Foot to obtain a li-

cenfed Theatre in this City; but the Malers and Pro-
fcnlors of the Univefitv, supported by the Magiltrates,
having prepared a Periticn, letting forth the dangerous
Tencency of a Playhouse here, with refpet to the im-
p,:ranr Interefis of Virtue and Learning, the ProjeEt
.was laid alide.

The Players, however, being so audacious as to con-

tinue to act in defiance of the Law, the Prcibytery did,
at their oun Charge, prosecute them before the Court
of Sellion; and prevailed in the Process. The Slayers
were fined in Terms of Law ; and Warrants being issucd
for apprehending them, they fled from Julfice. But
others came in their Place; who since that 'I ime have
attempted to elude the Law, by changing the Name of
the Playnhotri into that of the Corcel I-habl.
As such a flight Evaficn. the mere Change of a Name,
could not make the smallef Variation in the Nature of
the Thing, the I'refblytry continued to do :ll in thtir
Power, nnd in their Sphere, to prevent the growing
Evil ; and think thenifelves at this Time loudly called
upon, in ore Bo,.y, and with one Voice, to expnetu'ate,
in the Bowels of .ove and Compalion, with al under
their Care and Infpeclion.

VWhen our gracious Sovereign, attcntive to the Voice

of Providence, is calling from the Throne to Humnilia-
tion and Prayer, how unlfemly is it lor his Suhjecas tr
give themselves up to Mirth and Joliry ? When the
War in which we are engaged, and many awful Tok, ni
of the divine Dilplcafurc, befpcak us, in the Languace

ot

( 7 )

of an inspired Writer, to redeem the Time because the
Days are Evil, should that Time be squandered away in
running the conllant Roind of fooliih, not to fay sinful
Amusements ? When the Wants and Cries of the nume-
rous Poor require extraordinary Supplies, how unac-
countable is it to lavish away vast Sums for such vain and
idle PurFofes ? When the W ifdom of the Nation has
guarded the Inhabitants of this City and Suburbs from
the Infection of the Stage, by a plain and express S-a-
tute ; is it not a high Instance of Folly, to break down
that Barrier, and open a Door with their own Hands for
theatrical Representations ? which are in many Respects
no less inconliftent with good Policy, than unfiiendly to
Religion; and will be found sooner or later, to aftec
their temporal as well as spiritual Intcrefts.

On these Accounts, and for many other obvious and

weighty Considerations, the Prefbyterv, warnred with
just Concern for the Good of Sou!s, do in the Fear of
Gcd, x.-rrn, exort, and obtefl, all within their Bounds,
as they regard the Glory of God, the Credit of our holy
Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk worthy of the
Vocation v.here" i!h they are called, by (heming a sacred
Regard to the L.ord's Day, and all the Ordinances ofdi-
vine Inftituticn; and by discouraging, in their relpec-
tive Spheres, the illegal and dangerous Entertainments
of the Stage.

The Presbytery would plead with allin Authority,

with Teachers of Youth, lParents, and Mnflers of Fa-
milies, to restrain by every habile Mlethod, such as are
unie'r their Influence, liom frequenting thele Seminaries
ot Fol:y and Vice. 1 hey would Farticularly beseech
the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, letl by Et-
ampl.e, or from a foolish Desire of appearing in the ih-
ihinible \Volid, they be miffed into filch pernicious
Snares; Snares wvhich mutl neceflarily retard, if not en-
r;lely mar, that Progre's in the refpetive Parts of their
Education, on which their future Usefulness and Sticcefs
depndl. And, latlly, they would intreat andobteft Per-
foni, ct' al Ranks and Conditions, that, instead of con-
til blting to the grovwing L.icenticufncles of the Age, may
jiitiinguilh theinllvc Lbv flining as L i.hits in theWorld,

A 4 being

# Copy of the Declaration of the Revd. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day of February, 1757.

( 8 )

being blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without
Rebuke, in the Midst of a crooked and perverse Nation;
occupying, for the great Purposes of the Honour of God
and the Good of Mankind, that Time, that Subflance,
and those other Talents which they have received from
their Lord and Master.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the moll earnetf

Manner, call upon all who have the Interest of Religi-
on at Heart, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of the great Mediator, until
the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the Il'il-
,/ernefs be a fruitfifl Field, and the fruitfui Field be
Counted for a Forei : 7Then Yud.rment Jlall dwUell in
tbe a-ililerlne, ani Ribtcottjnefs remnain in the fruit-
ful Field; and the Iiork of Righteoi/r.efs flall be
Peac.e, and the Fffes? of RighteouinefJ, .~uietnefi and
,-l'uranre for e'ver.

'The Presbytery appoint this Addmonition and Exhor-

ration to be read from all the Pulpits within their
Bounlds, on the la.s Sabbath, bcing the 3oth Day of
this Month, immediately after divine Service before
Noon.
Copy cf the Declirn:ion of the Revld. PreJi'ylery of

Glafgov, rdartellthe 4 th Dqy of Febrtuaty, 1757.
T II E Prelbytery of Glifgovw having frcn a printed

T I'per, intitled, An Admonition and Exhortation

of the Reverend Presbytery of Ldinburgh,\which, among
other Evils prevailing, laments the extraordinary and
unprecedented Countenance given of late to lle Pl;v -
houre in that City; and having good Rcafbn to bclieve,
that this refers to the Ibllowing melancholy but notori-
ous Fads, that one who is a Mlinillcr in the Church of
Scotland did himself wvrite and compose a Stnae l'':;;,

intitlt(!,

(9)

intitled, IThe Tragedy of Douglas, and got it to be aaed
on the Theatre at Edinburgh ; and that he, with feve-
ral other M/inillers ot this Church were present, and
iome of them oftener than once, at the ating of the said
Play before a numerous Audience: The Prelbytery be-
ing deeply aftered with this new and strange Appear-
ance, think it tlhir Duty to declare, as they hereby do,
that they agree with the Presbytery of Edinburgh in
their Snntiments with relpea to Stage-Plays ; and parti-
cularly that fitch Entertainments, from what has been
tifually exhibited in them, and also fro:n the dissolute
livecs (for the molt part) and inahmous Charaters of
the IPhycrs, have been looked upon by the Christian
Church in all Ages, and of all different Comrunion.,
as extremely prejudicial to Religion and Morality, as
well as hurtlul to the other valuable Interests of human
Society, by the waftelitl Expcnce of Money and Time
they have occasioned ! and being convinced by long
Experience, a lure 'rell of the Tendency of any Ac.ion
or lIratiice, how vain it is to exp.c fucli a Relormation
ot'the Stage as is confidlent with the Ends aforesaid;
and therefore such Entertainments fliould lbedilcoiurpgd
and laid afde : And the Prelbyt-ry further confidering
that the unprecedented Countenance given to the Play-
lioule, in the l nflance mentioned, is greatly aggravated
hy a late ACt of i':aliamrent, rendering the Stage (be-
caufte not licenl.d) unlawful in Scotland, and allo from
the pielent Circuniflneis of the Nation with regard to
the \Var we are engaged in, the Dearth of Provilions,
andihe awful 'Ioker,s ol the Divine Anger against us
'I hey theretore hereby appoint ndt ins ruc such of their
MermLl is at flall rcpre tnt them in the cnfuing general
Afrmnil'isv c this Chlirch, to move and infi;l in a regulir
Nl,inlner, tlit the ven. rable AliLmlly do deLlare by a
putlliick Act, their Judgment andi that of liis national
C'I1hut. L, againit tlie l'nterta:nn(nts of the 'I heatre, as
of very hlltlful 'Tendency to ilhe Intcrcefi of lkeligion
and Sociktv. 2dIl, That the Al\:tIibly do fliiclly en-
quirev whether the Faclts above-mentioned, \iz. that a
klinilfer ot thii Chinich has comilpofcd and procu',cd to
be acted on tlic 'Theatre of (lte C;aton;ate of Edin.

A 5 burgh,

( lo )

burgh, the Tragedy called Dougas, and that the Re-
prelentation of the said Tragedy was attended by him
and several other Ministers, have been under the Con-
fideration of the Prelbyters refpetively concerned ; and
whether these Ministers have been found guilty, have
been censured as their Faults deserved; and to give
such Direaions as they in their Wisdom lhall find ne-
ceflary, that such Minifers and all others may be fenfi-
ble that the Churchl of Scotland will never protea
her Members in a Practice so unbecoming their Charac-
ter, and of such pernicious Tendency to the great In-
terests of Religion, Industry and Virtue. And lastly,
that the Afiembly would use their bell Endeavours to
obtain such an Explication and Enforcement of the AFt
of the 1 7th ofGeo. II. anent the Playhouse, as it may
not be liable to the pitiful Evasions by which it is now7
eluded.

PROLOGUE

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

Spoken by Mr. S P A R K S.

iN nnticnt times, whuen Brinin's trade ewas arn!s,

,4,i.l the lova'd in uftk of htryouth alariii,

l trod(-like Race fitulailedJfir England's f]mae .
IVio bir nit heard of nallant ['I ERICY's rname
AYy, and of DouG ..A, ? Such illufirious fces
In rival Rome an. Carthage never ro'e !
From anZe ti age brLiht J hone the Britiafire,
Anl every hero zv'.s a hero's /ire.
I'hen powerful fate decreed one -warrior's doom,
Up fprttnic tlhe Phaenix from his Parent's tomb.
Rut -'wt l/ thife fenterous rivalv fought antlfell,
VThefe generous rivals lv'dl each tlher well :
Tro' many a bloody field was lol an l wonn,
Atllhing in hate, in honour all wtas done.
Ib'hen PI E RCY wrong'd, defy'd lb i prince or peers,
FaI came the DOUGI.AS, wtith his Scottih spears;
An,, tvwhn proud D3ucr.AS made his Kin his foe,
For DouGI As, PI E cY b.nt his Englifh'bo-u.
Expell'd t ,ir native b'one hb adverse fnte,
They knock' , alternate at each otber's gate
Then blz'tl the Catlle (t tie

nit .litrht hour,

For him 'tbiZ/f arms hii f .

oak its firmefl totwer.

This n.rht a Do uc .. s your nrotefion claimrs;
.4 wvife ! a mother i pit) 's fofle/f names
'7e Jlory of ber woes indulgent hear,
/Ind lgrant your f/ippl;ant all /he be's, a tear;
In confltlencefJe ibes ; and hopes to fin
Each Engliflh breafl, like noble PIER CY's, IinJ:

*r

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSON E.

LoNDoN. EDI.NBURGn DUBLI,.

LordRANDOLPrn, Mr. RIDOUr. Mr. YOUNGER, Mr. DEXTER.
GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH. Mr. LOVE. Mr. STAYLEY;
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY, Mr. DicGS. Mr. SHERIDAN.
STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAN. Mr. LEE.
SEP.VANTS,

W OMEN.
MATILDA, Lady R.AN-} Mrs. WorPINGTON. Mrs. WARD. Mrs. KENNEDY.

DOLPI,
ANXA, Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HOPKINS. Miss G. PHILLIPS.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

DO U G L A S

A

TR A G E D Y.
e000000&00000000003Q00

ACT I. SCENE I.
The court of a caflle, surrounded with 'woods.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

E woods and wilds, whoei melancholy gloom
Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my burfling heart,

Farewel a while : I will not leave you long;
For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from the chiding stream, or groaning oak,
Still hcars, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
O Do uc;G s ! DOUGLAS ! If departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the palElon of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hcar'ft thy wretched wife
Weep for her hulband slain, her infant loft.
MIy brother's timelels death I seem to mourn,
Who perilh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plain which mortal car has never heard.
O dilregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.

Incapable

Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my DouGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RAN O LPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOI.I'H.
Lord Ran. Again there weeds of woe ! fay, do'tl

thou well

To feed a paflion which consumes thy life ?
The li ing claim some duty ; vainly theu
Beftow'll thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady Ran. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memodial ot his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord Ran. 'Time, that wears out the trace of decpeft

angui(h,

Has paRs o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou wec't not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir M1AL co.M :
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment;
For when thy brother fell, he frril'd to hear
That Do G LAS' (on in the fame field was slain.

Lady Ran. Oh ! rake not up the ahces of my fathers:

Implacable resentment was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with theDouc LAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft ; my ancetors
Compeli'd, at lafl, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is lelt. Had they not been To stern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord Run. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affection, and complacent kindness
Were all I wilh'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The florm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I flould perifli by the Danifl fwoid,
MIATILtrA would not shed one Tear the more.

Lady Ran. 'Thou do'tk not think so: woeful as I am

I love thy merit, and elteem thy virtues.
But whither goeft thou now ?

Lord

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe (lands
Of expealation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland, drive their fleet
And every soldier of both holts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home !

Lord Ran. Thou fpeak'lt a woman's, hear a warrior'

wish:

Right from their native lend, the flormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's strand !
'1 hen (hall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies (hun the fatal shore.

Lady Ran. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

'Whole manners, language, and whose looks are ltrange,.
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the fitter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,.
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Ioth for their valour famous thro' the world;.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they must have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflict.
Gallant in firife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paflime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
'When ev'ning comes the glory of the morn,
The youthlul warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either haplers land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

Lord Ran. I'll hear no more: this melody would make

A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep. the conquells he had made;
Yea, (like a monk), sing relt and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battle (lain.
.ady, farewel: I leave thee not alon ;
Yonder comes one whole love makes duty light.

r\8

Enter ANNA.

Anna Forgive the rashness of your AI NA'S love:

Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your Ibiitary thoughts:
And warn you of the hours that you neglet,
And lore in lannels.

Lady Ran So to lore my hours
Is all the ule I with to m:&ke ot time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, luits not v ith my state:

But Cure I am, since death firll prey'd on man,
Never did filler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the hulbjnd of your heart ?

Lady Ran. Oh !
Anna. Have I dillreft you with officious love,

And ill-tim'd mention of yuur brother's fate ?
Forgive me. lady: humble tho' I am.
The mind I bare partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
'Iheic piteous tears, 1'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power dilected thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

Anna I know not:

But since my words have made my milrefs tremble,
1 will speak to no more ; but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou (halt not be silent.

I'll trult thy llithlul love, and thou hialt be
Henceforth th' inftruded partner of my woes.
But what avalils it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to gise up
Thelir dead alive ?

Anna. W\hat means my noble miltrefs ?
Lady Ran. Didll thou not alk what had my sorrows

been ?-

If I in early youth had loft a husband ? -
In the cold bolom of the carth is lodg'd,
Mangi'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in sone cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.- ---

/1n114.I

.A,4na. 0 ! lady, moit rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady Ran. Alas ! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother fliould in battle save
The life of DOUG LAS' son, our house's boe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
To fee the vaunted filler of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS tO Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nordid I long reful'i the hand he begg'd;
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, when my tern fire was told
That the faife firanger was lord DOUcLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And queflion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity,
Thou irft of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the carth Iliou Id gape,
And ifom the gulph of hell deicruaion cry
To take dillimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durit own a truth To hardy !

Lady Ran. Tlihe firlt truth

Is eafielt to a\ ow. ''lli moral learn,

lhis precious moral, fiom my tragic talc.-
In a few d.ays the dreadf'ul ridings came
'That Doue 1. As and mni brother both wecre lain.

IM lord my lili: ! my hutlband !-mighty God !
\\hat had I done to merit luch afflittion ?

,nrua. My dearell lady ' Many a tale of tcars

I've lillen'd too; but never did I hear
A tale to nad as thi;;.

Lald) Rantr. In the first tdn!v

Of

Of my ditfraEing grief, [ found myself----
As women wilh to be who love their lords.
But who durst tell my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time should make my fatheT 's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her fiiter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My murder'd child !-had thy fond mother sear'd
The lots us thee, nie had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her fathei's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

Anna. Not fecn. or heard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December: wind and rairi

Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The deflin'd road; and in it's swelling flood
My faithful 'ervant perifh'd with my child.
0 hapless son ! of a mofi hapless fire I--
Eut they are both at reft; and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd ro walk,
Like a guilt-troubled ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tiho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
R AN OLPII, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;.
And RANDO I. p n now pofidells the domains.
That by Sir M.a r.coL. d's ceath on me devolved;
Domains that shou!d to Dou GL s' Ion have giv'n
A balon's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my lboohing thought., while I bcwail't
'I he flIugihtcr'd lather of a Ion unborn.
And when that son cinme. like a ray from hoax'n,

v hich fliines and dilappears; alas ! my rliid !
-low long did thy Isond mother r3a'p the hope
Of having thee, (he knew not how, reftor'd.
Year alter year hath .wo: n her hope away ;
Eut lct fill undiminilh'd her delire.

AtInn.7

Anna. The hand that spins th' uneven thread of life,

May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady Ran. Not in this world: I have confider'd well

It's various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself ?
And fveet affetion prove the spring of woe.
O ! had I died when my lov'd husband fell !
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the furn
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Anna. That God, whose ministers good angels are,

Hath (hut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we must leave this theme: GLENALVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly ilkfome in an hour like this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of RA N D o LPH's heir?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'8

virtues.

Subtle and shrewd, he osiers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
Andl he with ease can vary to the taste
0;' diffircnt men, it's features. Self-denied,
And mafiler of his appetites he iemsr :
But his ferce n::ture, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to tIize unlfcn the wilh'd-for prey.
Never ,vere vice and virtue pois'l so ill,
As in G. I: MA LVoN'S unrtlentiig mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in w:r,
And ilands aloft in thcfe unruny tim.cs.
\\ hy I dclliiila him thus I'll tl hlcrta'ter:
Stay and Ll;tin him till I reach the calf!e.

[ L.x: Lady P. A D o LP L.

Aonna. 0 happincfs ! wlicre art thou to b. found ?

I fee thou dwellelt not with bilth and beauty,
' ho' grac'dcl ithl grandeur, and in wealth arrny'd:
Nor doll thou, it would seem, with vittue dwell;
El:c had this tgentle lady mifl'd thee not.

Enter GLF. NA. VO .
Glen. What doll thou muse cn, meditating maid ?

Lick

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaverr

Anna. Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou lay'd, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd !

Glen. What doll thou doubt of? what hall thou to do
Vith filbiedts intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queflioned: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boall of beauty: whlo so fair as flie ?
lut I must follow : this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her ancient woes. [Exit Anna.

CLENALVON fo/l5.

So ! Lady RA N D LPH shuns me- by and by

I'll woo her as the lion does his brides.
'I he deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of there rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The season is nmoft apt; my founding lteps
WVill not be heard anidft the din of arms.
RANDO .Prl has liv'd too lung: his better fate
IHad the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Relcu'd and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a fiender consolation !
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To low in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvell. Yet I am not fare:
iv love, or lomething like it. flung, inflam'd,
Madly I hlabb'd my pallion to his wife,
And lle has thrraten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's v ill I do not know:
Ilut well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
1 will not live in fear : the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
\Who flands belwixt me and my chief dcfirc.
No bar but lit; flie has no klinllial Inea;r
No brother in his ifcer's quarrel bold;
And for the lighteous caulc, a firanger's cause,
I knowv no chiefl that will detf G LEN A LVON.

ACI

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT II. SCENE .

A Court, &c.
Entrer Jrvants and a Jtran'er at one door, and Lady

RANDOLPH andANNA at another.
Lady Ran. H A T means this clamour? f ranger

VV speak secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

ift Ser-v. By us no firanger ever fufter'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild las call'd us forth;
So lore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and young man, zwith their

swords drawn and bloody.
Lady Ran. Not vain the firanger's fears! how fares

my lord ?
Lord Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whole valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the cross way four arm'd men attackd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOr.PH low,
Had not this brave and generous Itranger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fare,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him; but his active arm
Srtuck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fiercest two ; the others fled amain,
And lelt him maler of the bloody field
Speak, Lady R. N no r. H ; upon beauty's tongue
)Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him oIr thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

.Iy heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your tide againll such fearful odds.

Have

Have you yet learn'd of him whom we Ihould thank ?
Whom call the saviour of Lord RANDOLPH'S lile?

Lord Ran. I alk'd that question, and he anfwer'd not:
But 1 must know who my deliv'rer is. (tothb Stranger.)

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obicure,

Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is enobled

By the great King of Kings ! thou art ordain'd
And flampt a hero by the ibvereign hand
Of nature! blush not, flower of modefly
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Strang. My name is NORVAL : on the Grampian hill!

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to encreafe his store,
And keep his only Ion, myself at home.
For I had heard of.battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven Coon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which roTe lat night, round as my ihielrd,
Had not yet fill'd her hoins, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rufl'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled,
For lafety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
'he road he took, then hated to my friends:
Whom, with a troop of lifty cholen nimn,
1 met advancing The pursuit 1 kIl,
'Till we o'ertook the Ipoil-encumbei'd foe.
Ve fought and conquer'd. Erea sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd th. ir chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I m ear.
Returning home in n iumph, I ditdain'd
The shepherd's slothful lie ; and having heard
That our good king had lummnon'd his bold peers
'o lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my lather's houie, and took with me
A cholen ltrvant to crl)nolut ml) fieps:-
\'on tlemllin:g cowairdl ,i o foi ook his mailer.
Journeying with this intent, I palt tlihe tuv. crs,

And

And, Ileaven-direfted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modcfty rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer ! thou shalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottish king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha ! mny MATILDA ! wherefore flarts that tear?

Lady Ran I cannot fay: for various affeaeioo,

And strangely mingled in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art fare; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obscure and fiiendlefs, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftinAion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,
And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He stands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compals of his fivord.
On this my mind refleced, whilif you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts.

My deeds shall follow where thou point'it the way !
Next to myself, and equal to GLF NALVON,
In horour and command fl:all NORVAL be.

A'orv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stoo0 I in lilch a preltnce: vet, my lord,
'I l',e's something in my Lreall which makes me bold
'1 fay, that NC:,VA, ne'er will Ihame thy favour.

',ady R,,n. 1 v ill be sworn thou wilt not.Thou thalt be

I' ':nillht; iand ever, as thou dictll to day,
V n.h :appy valour guard the liri of RA I Ino).PH.

Lord Ra,:. Well haft thou spoke. Let mii. Icrbid reply.

(To NOtRV AL.)
We are thy debtors fill j thy high deecrt

O'ertops

# SCENE II.

O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languii lobr the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

Aorv. Let us be gone, my lord.
Lord Ran. (To Lady RANDOLPH.) About the time

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expect us to return. This night once more
Within there walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the teaft.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
IHimfelf to social pleasure ; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt RANDOLPH and Nor VAL.

SCENE II.

LadyRANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady Ran. His parting words have fruck a fatal tutl.

O DoUuLAS ! DOUG LAS! tender was the time
When we two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguish and delpair
Has heav'n annex'd to those lvwift palling hours
Of love and fondnels ! Then my bolom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fiar,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Anna. May gracious heav'n pour the Iwveet balm of

peace

Into the wounds that fes.er in your breafl I
For earthly conbolation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. Cne only cure can hIav'n itfelfbeflow;-

A grave-that Lb; in which the weary celt.
Wretch that I am i Alas! why am I lo ?
At every happy parent I repinel
How blest the mother of yon gallant No RVA L !

She

She for a living husband bore her pains,
And hel rd him hl ess her when a rman was born:
Sic nurs'd her smiling inlant on her breast;
''ended the chill, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
S; t with aflfeion's triumph, saw the youth
I1l grace and comeliness fiirpafs his peers:
\' liilf: I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

.'nan. Alas! alas! why will you thus resume

\'ur grief afrefnl ? I thought that gal'art youth
\\ou.l fbr a while Iave won you from your woe.
(n hiim intent }ou gazed, with a look
vMuch more delighted, than your pensive eye
lHas deigned on other objecls to bestow.
Lady Ran. Delighted fay'lt thou ? Oh ! even there

nine eye

Found fuel for my life-contfiming sorrow.
I tlr u:ht. that had the son oso DOU A. S liv'd,
I'le niiglt have been like this young gallant firaii.gr,
And pair'd with hiln in features and in fi;al't:
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
Mvi bnv with blooming No itnv r. migh!t have niumber'd.
\\'hilll thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
(Cn my lad h.art, and kindled tip : londne-'
'or thli young firanier, wand'ring from his home,
An t !;Ice n orphan call upon ism care.
I v. il pro:cc tihee, (faiJ I to mnfclf)
\\ iJ; all mny power, and grace wikh all my favotr.

.n:m':. Sure heav'n ill blels so generous a relolve.

You musil, my noble dame, exert your power:
You nu ll a;-l;:e : devi.cs will be t'ram'd,
And arrows pointed at the brcalf ot No RvAL.

Lady Ran. (G LE N . LV O N'S fallt and crafty head will

% ork

Aainft a rival in his kinrman's love,
lr' (ic ettr Iimn not : I only can.
!,l as 11Che is, GI. N A .LV IN will beware
1 low lie pulliis down the !,jLic rl.;iL I aile.
]' Il1)U the arti , of y)outi No, ItVA L'S 01 iti,.
''I . pleasing to a'lliire: molt ap, w\v.s 1
To this s.llc-tiol in my l;tan * l:)ys;
'1 hough now 1 tci. to you iliui ,l: up, re:ir'd

B UVi;hin

WMithin l:e narrow compass of mv woe.
Have you not ibmetimes k-en an ear'v flowcr
Open it's bud, anid lpreEd its silken leaves,
To catch flveet airs, and odcurs to bestow
'Then, by the keen llall nipt, Full in it's leaves,
And, tho' fiili living, die to scent and beauty ?
Emblem of me ! atiiition like a Itorm,
lla:lh Lilled the forward bioflom of my heart.

En!er ,GLE NA I.VON.
GlCc-. \Where is my dearell kinrman, noble RAN-

DOL'H ?
LaJy Ran. I-lave you not heard, GLEN ALVON,Of

the bae---

Clen. I have : and that the villains n-y not'fcape,

V, iil a tirong !,and I have begirt the wood:
I' thty lurk there, aiive they l.hall be taken,
And torture force frrom theml ti' important h-crrt.
\\ heltier forne Ib ot oR.l DOLpr'S hlir'd tlir lv'ords,
Or if-

L.asdv RSn. 7 hat care becormes a kinf:.nn's love.

I have a CUli Il for L i. . V )ONS car. [L /
ir. AN AN .

C;!en. 'l'o hin your counil .; :lr.avs are cer.mrmrds.
Lady Ran. I have 1not found L : thou art known to me.
Glen. Known !
La'y Ran. And mot'l certain is rry cause of l:now-

ledgo.

dIn. \ h:;t do )'cu kr.oow ? By the mrft bletfd crols,

\'c(u much aina.e me. No created tiling,

c'ul'ct!fcxcept, durlt thus accofti 1. E N. I.VoN.
Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold ? and dolt thou make a

merit

O rhy pretended metknefs? I his to r.e,
\ ho, with a gentlcncels hllich duty blames,
1-,a.e hitherto conceal'd what, itdivulg'd,
WVould make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals fhudtcr at a crime like thinc.

(,ln. Thly %iltue awv:s me. Firlt ol wominklind!
Peimit me yet to thy, that the fond man

hornm love tranlports beyond lfrilt xirtue's bounds,

11' lie is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpititd cannot Le. Pity's the alims \W ich

# SCENE III.

Which on such beggars freely is beltow'd:
For mortals know that love is fill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances flill:
As fire, when kindled by our flepherds, moves
'Thro' the dry heath belbre the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Relcrve thele accenits for tome other ear.

To love's apology I lilltn not.
Ma:k thou my wrdls; for it is meet thou should'st.
-His brave d.liverer RAN DOrP H here retains.
I'rhaps his presence may not p!eaSe thee well:
Uut, at thL peril, practice aught againf! him:
I.et not thy jealoulv attempt to rnake
And loofenl the rood root he has in R.A NDO.PH ;
V, hlole lavouritt s I know thou hait prr'n'anted.
''houo look'lt at me, as if tlcu fain would'fL pry
Into my) heart. 'Tis open as my fpecch.
I give this early caution, and put on
'Il e curb, before thy temper breaks away.
Tliel f in-r:ldles stranger niy protction cliin:;.:
Hi lii. :d 1 a::;, a-ld be not thou his icu. [:.:.

S C E N E Il.

1Manet L E N A LVO .

Ch(iii tla:t I was, to Itart at my own hadlow,
And be the filallow fool of coward confcionce !
I ani lov.ht I have been ; what I fliould be.
'lhe darts of delitinv have almost picrc'd
>.Iv :arle heart. I-ad 1 one zrainof faitl
In holv l-ends, and rcligious tales,
I I1ouid crncltide there was an arm above
ll.lat logiiht anaililt me, an'l malignant turn'd
Tlo catch my lIelf, the frutle lihare I set.
\' hy, rape an1 murder arc not limple means
''il; inicillc0t ranpe to RA M Do L.P l gave a Ipoulc;
And the in endedl murder introiluc'd
A h votirite to hide the fun iron mre;
And worst of all, a rival. 1urning hell:
'1 hi were thy center, if I thought lhe lov'd hiln
'i. certain flie conctmnis me ; nay commands me,
tlnd waves the fl :!' of ber dilfllaafur: o'cr me,
In hia behllil- Ald llhall I thus bc brav'd ?

B 2 Curb'd,

# ACT III. SCENE I.

(urb'd, a- flie calls it, by dime chasitvy ?
Infernal fiends, it any fiends there are
More fierce thian love, ambition, and revenge,
Rifie up and till nmy bosom with your fires
And policy rcmorfelels? Chance may spoil
A single aim ; but perseverance mutt
Proiper at latit. For chance and tate are words
Perfiltive wi'dom is the fate of man.
Darkly a project peers upon my mird,
Like the red moon vwhen riling in tli east,
Crofs'd and divided by Itrange colour'd clouds.
I'll ieek the slave vho came widh NO'lVA i hither,
And tor his cowardice w;as lipurned trom himn.
I've known a lbllower's ranklcd bobom breed
\,-nom most fatal to hi- lcedleis lord. [Exit

.^ . > *,.':, v' .'i *:'? , '."* ,

:'
: ' > ¢ ¢ .

3 ..' 31 3.. *.
. '.

AC T II. S C E N E I.

A Co:w.-, &c. .r' jir-e.

Enter iA .x\.
Anna."T H Y vat{{s, grriel'! great narure's ordei

J break,

And change the noon-tide to the n;ic!-;nii t Iour.
'\liillt Lady RANDOLPHi sleeps 1 v.ail walk torrh,
And talte the air that breaths on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye miiiiilt'rs
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and ficrphs who delight in gcodnels !
Fortlhkc your Ikies, and to her couch declccnd
'.I here from her fancy chale thole diltmal ilrmn
That haunt her waking; her fad Ipirit ch.rm
With images celcflial, luch as pleale
'1 he bLllt above upon their golden bed,.

EI/nter S itVA

: T.

Str--. One of the vile aflalinsx s licur'd.
'ec found the villain lurking in the wood:
\\'ith ldradlul in'precations he deniks
All knnwlkdgc ot the Climei. IBut this is not
-li tlirll eray: thlei jL\\clx were conceal'd

# SCENE II.

In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of some that he has murder' d.

Anna. Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart,

The chof n crest of Do U G LA S' valiant name !
Thele are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit ANNA.

IEntcr s/ervants quith a prisone-r.

Prif. I know no more than does the child unborn
Of hliat you ciarge me vith.

JI ,,rv. You 1'y Ib, Sir!

Rut torture soon fha!l ilake you speak the truth.
Behol-. the l.ady of Lord RANDOIPH conies:
Prepare yu'uillt to meet her jutt revenge.

SC ENE II.

En'er LIadv RANDOLPr. and ANNA.

Anna. Suirron your utnmo{t fortiiude, bciore

You fpe-k with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady Ran. Thou thalt behold me sith a desperate

heart,
Hear how my infant periflhd. See he kneels.

[TThe prisoner kneels.
Prif. Heav'n bless that countenance, lb sweet and

mild!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 1ive me, lady ! from thele cruel men,
Who have attacked and fdiz'd me ; who accuse
Me of intended imurder. As I hope
lFor mercy at the judrmcnl t lt o' God,
'I he tender lamb, that never iipt the grars,
L not mone innocent than I of murder.

lady Ran. Of this man's guilt wlhat proof can ye

product ?

iif Ser.v. We found him lurking in the hollow C I) nn,

When view'd anl call'd upon, aniaz'd he fled.
We overtook him and cnquir'd from whence
And what lie was : he aid he came from iar,
Ani was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fililiead v ith tlis, we fearch'd his cloatils,

1 3 And

And found these jewels; whose rich value plead
Most powerfu!ly againit him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us try
His fubbornnels againlf the torture's force.

Prif 0 gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life !

Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, Ipare my age !
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to tie grave with pain.

Lady Ran. Account for thee : thine own they can-

not be:

For these, 1 fay : be tfedlaft to the truth
Detected fallhood is molt certain death.

[AN N A remove; the ferevants ann reltrn;.

Friil' Alas ! I'm fore befct ! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin againlt his loul!
Eternal jullice is in this most jul !
1, guiltless now, mult former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! ANNA hear !-cncemore I charge

thee Ipeak

The truth diret ; for these to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which ir the remainder talli-s not,
An infiant and a dreadful death abides thee.

/' i/. '1 hen, thus adjur'd, I'di lcak to you as juil

As i' vou weie the niiiiiller of h1(a en,
.Sent edou n to learch tlle i.cret lins o'f men.

Some eighteen yecars ago, I rented lan13

Of brave Sir NI A LCo L, then 1A LAl M.tO' s lord;
But falling to decay, his iervants Icizl'd
All that 1 had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Fuur helplefi in'al:s an'l tluir weeping mother)
<Jut to thl numrcy of the wvinter wvind;.
A little hovel by tile river's fide

ecc iv'd us : thlce hard labour, and the fl.;l
In linsing, which was ormcr;y my Iporrt,
Supported life. W hillt thus we poorly liv'd,
One llormy niglt, as I remneilber well,
'The wind and I ila heat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river dlo n, andll loud and o.t
'1 hle angry fpilit of, te wnv:cr hfl ik'd.
At the dead hour of night w .is heard the cry

Of one in jeopardy. I role and ran
To wh'lre rthi circling e]Jy of a poul
lI;;a.lal thl- f..rd, is'd oit to brin, v.i'-lin

rM! rc ih wscilcver floating thing the llhtim

1[.id caughtl. 'Tie voice was caa'd ; thi per.on lo :
Iut lo.jkiiig .l 1 inJ earn:--l on the waters,
I;. th: n-.;) 's igl.it I i.l.v, w:ii;-l d r'u:il an.l rouni,
A b.'-kci: 1.)n I d.cw ik to the banl:,
An.l nc.ild c'J:ious th-re an in!ant lay.

ladv Ruan. \,'as he alive ?

'r,/' 1-e wv.s.
L..'; Rn,. ilhuman tlnt thou art !
II,.e coul.!t 'lt lhou kill what v.aves an. t:;np:' s :;,i ?

'ri/: I a;n not lo inhnia.in
LadJ Rn. DiJft thou r.: ?
Ain ,. I..' no'J:e miilrcis you are rnv'd too iiu;h :

T'hi.i naln has not tilh a p:l o'- llern ri;urd':
Let lim. go on, and you, I hope, i;l helar
Good tidings of your kinmaa's long lo.: chill.

Pi i: 'l'h needy man, who ha, known better days,

One w.hom dititrels has si:ed at the world,
Is lle wllo.m rempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prolperous men
l.it up their h:nds and wonder who could do them.
And ituch a man was I ; a man declin'd,
Who law no .nd of black adlverfity:
Yet, tor the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
I lave rouch'd that intfinr, with a hand of harm.

Lady Ran. Ha ! dust thou lay lb? ''hen perhaps he

lives !

Prif. Not many days ago he was alive.
Lady Ran. O Cod o hieav'n ! Did he then die so

latelv ?

Pri,. I did not fay he died ; I hope he lives;

Not miany days ago these eyes beheld
H-im, Ilouiil'hing in youth, and heallh, and beauty.

I.ady Ran \Vhire is he now ?
P ijf Alas ! I know not where.
L.ady Ran. 0 late ! I fear thee fill. Thou riddler
Direc and clear ; elc' I will Iearch thy foul.

Anna. Pelmilt me, ever honloui'd ' Keen impatience,

B .4 'I'lo'

Tho' hard to be refcrain'd, defeats itfeif-
Purlue thy flory with a faithful ton uc,
To the last hour that thou didll keep the child.

Prif. Fear not my faith, tho' I muit speak my flame.

Within the cradle where the infant lay,
Was Itov'd a mighty itcre of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did re!olve to hide,
Fron) all the vcorld, this wondicr'ul event,
And like a pea-.i:t breed the noble child.
' hat none r.ni ht rnurk the change of our estate,
WVc lelt the country, travell'd tj the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradua!lv brought forth
Our secret w-alt!. But G3cc'5 al! li.cing eye
ltlithld our avarice, and fniote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, thz itranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain thenl would I,
Wl:o with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have truilld him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his owI]n t-cret : but my anxious wii.,
Foreboding evil never would consent.
Mean while the stripling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was tierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myrelf againlt his warlike bent;
But all in vain : for when a desperate band
Of robbers fiom the savage mountains came-

Lady Ran,. Iternal prox idence ! VIhat is thy n:lme
Prif. My name is No Rv A r. and my name he bears.
Lady Ran. '1 is lhe; 'tis he hinmlilf! It is my ton !

O Iovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I flw !
No wonder A N A. that my bosom burn'd.

Anna. Jult arc our tranfporrs: ne'er maq woman's

heart

Prov'd m ith flich fierce extremes. High fated dame
Blut yet rcn ember that you are behel!d
By Icrvile eyes; your gdelurcs nmay be seen
Impallion'd, (range ; perhaps your words o'er heard.

Lady Ran. Well do.l thou counsel, As N A : Heaven

bellow 1On

On me that wisdom which my state requires !

Anta. The moments of deliberarion pal:,

And soon you mull resolve. This ulfful man
Mvull be difmils'd in lafety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer reltu n.

Pri/; If I, amidlt adlonilhment and fear,

Have of your words and gefiures lightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient maltcr;
The child I re'cued from the flood is thine.

Lady Ran. With thee dillimulation now were vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir M.LCOLM ;
lhe child thou rcfcu'dft from the flood is mine.

Pri/: Blest be the hour that made me a poor man!
My poverty hath lhv'd my ma!ler's houle !

Lady Ran. 'Ihy word;i lurplize me : ure thou doff

not feign :

The tear (lands in thine eye ; such love from thee
Sir VI.\ LCOL1M's houle delerv'd not; if aright
'Thou told'll the flory of thy own diflrefs.

Pr,-i Sir MA r. co r. of our barons was the flower ;

The t'ik: 'c: fricnd, the helt and kindell mailer.
Itat ah ! hi knew not oi my fad eltate.
A'tcr that battle, where his gallant oIn,
Y'our own brave brother, fell, the good olA lord
Crew delperate and recklcfs of the world;
Anrl never, as he eril was wont, went I'orth
i'o overlook the conducA of his l;ervants.

;I, them I was er

out, and then I blame:

,-iy heaven lo judge me as 1 judg'd my mattcrr!
A\n.l God Iof love me as I love his race !

Lady Ari v. -lis race lhall yet reward thee. On thy

lhith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's loul;.
Renmcn:b'rcl tilhol a little lonely hut,
'!'hat like a lhern:itce appears
Amnong the cliits ot Carron ?

', /'. I remember
'T1e cottage of' tle cliiiu.

Lady Ran. 'Tis that I mean:

'There dwells a man o' vencrable age,
Who in my father's service spent his ycith:
Tell him I efnt thee, and with him remain,

L 5; 'Tiil

# SCENE III.

Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now
''o me halt told. No more but this, and thou
Sha!t live in honour all thy future days;
'hy lon To long fnall call thee father itill,
And all the land (hall bless the man, who ilv'd
The son of DOU LAS, and Sir MALCOL,,M'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou Ihouldlt meet
Him whom thou call'lt thy Ion, still call him l,
And mention nothing of his nobler lather.

Pri,: Fear not that I Ihall mar so fair an harvest,
By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.

hlly did I leave my home and ancient d-mne ?

'To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear there jewels in his arms;
Which might, 1 thought, be chall-ng'd, and lb bring
To light the fccre: of his noble birth.

Lady RAN DO LP H goes ltorards tl Se tr, ints.

La.!' Ran. This man is not the affalliin )ou fu!ci ttcd,

I'ho' chance comnbin'd rome likelihoods agai'.ft him.
H-e is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their ligit owner, whom in ha'te he fe ks.
'' is meet that you should put him; on his way,
Sine your mifitaken zeal hath dragg'Jd him hiither.

[Excet:.'l S!ral:gtr and Serlaniu.

SCENE 1I1.

lady RANDOl.PII Ar. ,\' \A.

Lady Ran. \ ly faiithul Ax N ! lo thlo u (hiare n.yjo?

I know thou dolt. Unparalle!' cvc nt!
Rca.lting from lhca\ en to tarrt, JIilovali's arm
Snatch'd firom the waves, and blings to me n-y fol!
Judge of the widow, and the orplianl' lthUIr!
Accept a w idow's :nil a mother's thail(s
For iuclh a gi.t \\ hat does my A xN A tAli:lk
Of tlie young eagl t ol'a valiant ne't ?
How fioon he gaz'd on bright and buriinn, armn,
Spurn'd the low lunghill where hi, .:il h;:id thrown him,
And towtvr'd up to the region of' Iis fire.

Anna. Hl:.v fondly did your eyes devour the boy !
Myitcrious naturt, with the unli."t cord

Of

Of powerful infiinct, drew you to your own.

Lady Ria. The ready story of his birth bLliv'd

Supprelt my fancy qui:e; nor did he owv
'lo any liktnels mny Ib lud,!enl lavotr:
But now I lon, to lLe his lace aglin,
Exa3n:ine eveiy ieatuie, and find out
The lineaments of DouGLiAs, or my ovwn.
But mos of all 1 lcng to let l:im know
\' ho llis true parents ale, to cla!p lhis neck,
And tell himn :ll the story ct his liatht:r.

,mrtiaM. \'V i'l wary cauition you nlutt bear )our'lrc

In public, left your tn;lcerneis brea!k orth,
And in obfrslrs.'r Itir coijitdures Itraiigc.
For, it' a cherul in the Iiape ot woman
Should v.al'; this world, yet defamation would,
Like a xilc cur, balk at the angel's train-

o-J .iv the balron Itartztl at ) our tears.
Ladly Ri,/ Hie did to As XA ! w.ll thy miitrefs klnows,

It' tt lcai't ci:cumlta:icc, mnote or clfi:nce,
Should touch the baron's vce, l ii llht wou!d be
\\ iril j:aou(y ciibrdcr'd. ;ut rhc no:e
] t d(ocs behoxe n'e inliant to d&clare
'Ihe b:rth of Diu; LAS, and a:lcrt his ri,!:ts.
IThis night I purpo.: :isi imy on to nmeer,
Reveal tle l;-cret aLli e n;iult wi.h !i,ii:
For v.i:C he is or in fiund ijul dgient (r;s.
:\A hc' ;:..,l now, 10 lou i

d :is n/!;'e iai'er,

Airra '; l in n l tire'' ca.e : I ii l, ici n, Ii.; I _-''i l,
V . crc: l l : np.i, ;::d : tu'l o.t dLe.i '.t
I'lho,c tni i i in t..ls hl) l.n ilm ai:a. s wi e.
I'rt, x\ hun lhe matter an:iti'd hIs n.igl;iy Ilind,
Up r,'i thie hlru :en llis piercing Lye
S.i ()b'.r a.:ion ; on eaLh glakie ot t'.;o11':t
D'L.i, i tnul:ox\ d, as thlie tiuiad-r. bot
I',,.i.:, ithe lil. h.

ii;,,I,. 'l'hilt demon i aunts you i:.i:
B1Lold Gt t. ,X A . vu '.

I adly Ra/,. Now 1 lllln h'm not

This day I lirav'd him in b-lal: ol Niotv. .
'erhiaps too far: at lealt my nic.r i.-rs
For DoULGl.AS thus illi rpr:t.

Enter GLENALVON.

Glen. Noble dame !

The hov'ring dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates ; but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country or to lose themfclves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligence GLL-

NALVON ?

Glen. A nimblecourier Cent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
JnForm'd me as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
Near to that place where the fea-rock immense,
Amazing bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then must this western army march to
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs. [joiln

Glen. Beyond all quelcion. If impairing time
-las not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
Which lyes to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water wafted armies, whose chief strength
Lies in firm foot, untlank'd with warlike horc::
If martial skill dirccts the Danilh lords,
'Ihere inacccffible their army lies
''o our fwifl f'ow'ring horcf, the bloody field
Mulft man to man, r.nd foot to fboo, lhe .ou qt.

Lady Ran. How manv mothers lhall bewail rthir sons ?

Ilow many wi:dows wuctp their hulaPnd.i ilain !
Ye dames of Denmark! ev'n for you I fecl,
Who, sadly fitting on the lIa-ceat shore,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

Girn Oft has th' unconqutr'dl Caledonian sword

Widow'd the north. The children of the 1lain
Come, as [ hoape, to meet their tather's fate.
1 he monltcr war, with her inlernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and lile-cnding pain,
Are objcts liitcUl to r. eN, . vo 's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death
Reproach. nore piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady Ran. I fcoin thee not, but when I ought to

scorn;

Nor

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Against audacious vice alterts herself.
I own thy worth, GLEN A I.VO ; non- more apt
Than I to praile thine eminence in arms,
And b. the echo of thy martial famr.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pallion:
Go and purlue a lawful miirris, glory
Upon the Danish crelts, redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the fliield of RAN )Or.P I.

Glen. One instant flay, and hear an alter'd man,

When beauty p!eids for virtue, vice abalh'd
Flies it's own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will fliew how truely:
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidlt the f&ock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm.
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady Ran. ACt thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy

friend:

But that's thy leall reward. Believe me, fir,
The truely generous is the truely wile ;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Laly RANDOI.PII.

Glen. [ filus. ] Amen! and virtue is its own reward !-

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which Ihe loves to Ipeak. Honey'd aflint,
How pleasing art thou to the tatle of man,
And woman allb ! flattery direCt
Rirely dilfufts. They little know mankind
Who doubt it's operation: 'tis my key.
And opes rh- wicket of the human heart.
Hlow far I have fuccecded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lul I'd awhile: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whillt she and RANDOoLP HI live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'cr my head thfpends dilgracc and death,
By that weak hair, a peevith female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows

Of

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That lave of No:tVA L'S 1 have tounti mofl apt:
I shew'd him Fold, and he has pawn'd his Ioul
To fay and fwcar whatever I luggelt.
No lv AL, I'm told, has that alluiing lo.-k,
'Twixt mnin andl ( mnan, which I have oblierl'd
To charm lhe nicer and liniialltik d(iaies,
Who are, like L.a;.y RA N D (I. 'H, full of virtu:.
In raising RA \, I)Ol. i j: alouTv, I may
But point him to the truth. I-le iclidom errs
Who thiniks the worst he can of wovmarkinJ.

O .*, c::.. *:i*. *. ..~ . : ..,:>,.' :', ..r'37".3 .:, '
1 iz':. .'^*;..' :3 *O:

ACT IV. S C E N E I.

Flourih- of Trumpetls.

Enter Lord RA ND no . I 1H atle.tl.
Lord Ran. 1'Ummon an hunired lior'e, by brek of

,j day,
To wait our plea'ure at the cal'le gite.

Enter i.a?.!v RAx\DO It1.
Lady Ran. Ala; ! my lord ! I've heard unwelcome

New ;
The Danes arc lanldel.

Loid Ran. iAX', no iiironl this

Of tile Norlhumblrian h: nt to rake a spoil
No Iporlive war. no tournanmnt e(fa. ,
O' loome nouing kini' h rc!cl: d to Irlcak a spear,
And :fain with holtile blood hi. maitln aims.
'1 'ie Danes are laIncd: wve mll beat them ba.k,
Or live tl;e ;la. cs ol' Dcni ill:. .

Lady Rat'. IDrealilil tilies!
I.ord PI.ai. I he fincel:ls xillages are all forsaken;

The tremllilti. mothers, and their children lodtl'd
In v.'tll girt tuweis and caltles ; whilit the men
Retire indli;nnt. Yet, like broken waves,
'I hey but rttire more aw ul to return.

L addy Ran. ImTmenfe,as tame reports, the Danifi host!
Lord Ran. \\ .c;c it a ntium'rous as loud fame reports,

An

An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro':
13rothers, that frrink not from each others fide,
Anl Ibond companions, f;il our warlike files:
For his dear ol7spring, and tbi- w;ie he loves,
'1'he hulfbnd and the tearl'fs Ilacer arm
In vulgar breafti heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mi'tes his daring lord.

Lady Ran. Men's mi;didarc:-nper'd, like their swords,

for war:

Lovers of danger, on defllruion's brink
They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our galiant guef ?

Lord RIan. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery fleed,
Who!s ltubbornnefs had foil'd the Ifrcngth and skill
Of every rider. But behold lh conies,
In carnelt conversation with G I.E N ALVO N.

Enier NORV-.\L an,t (GLENALVO1.

CItr.NA LVO N ! 'ith the lark arile; go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in )ondlr vale:
'livate I travel to the royal camp:
NO V A L, thou goeflt wi:h me. But fay, young man,
\Vhece clidit thou learn ib to dilcourCe of war,
.Aml. in such terin:, as f o'erheard to day?
V\'.:r is no i'l.tai ftince, n' r it's phralc
A 'lu age tatli t among the flieplihrd frwains.

.'ajSrv. Small is the n.ill lmy lord de ig';ts to praise

In h'.!i hle favours -HLar ltorn whence it came.
l..n-'a! h a mountain's b: ow, the most remlote
A::l iniccellible by Ilhepherds trod,
In ;i 'lccp cave, dU L by no motl hand,
.\ !i.r:it lived; a melancholy man,
\V.'o x1.Ia tlhe wonder of our wand'ring swains.
.\iller.. and lonely, ctuel to himself,
Dl) tihe'v report him ; the cold earth his bed,
\Vater lis drink, hi3 fool the lcepherds alirs.
I we'nt to liCe hin, and my heart was toucl'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entring on dilcourfe, such storics told
As male me oft Trvifit his fad c.ll,

For

For he had been a soldier in his youth ;
Anti fought in anmous battles, when the peers
O. Europe, by the bold GO Et D o led,
AgainIt th' usurping Infidel dilplay'd
The crofsof Chlilt, andl won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech truck from me, the okl man \wcu'd llake
His years away, and :ia his young encounteis:
Then. having fllew'd his wounda, he'd lit himl down,
And all the live-long day dilcourt; of war.
To help my fancy, in thic tincn;h gre.:n turL
He cut the figures of t!i- rnamr:lal;'d hoils;
Defcrib'd the motions, anl explain'd the ulC
Of the deep colunn, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent. anil the phalanx firn.
For all that Saracen, or Chrillian knew
Of war's vail ait, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. VWhy did this foklicr in a delfrt hide
Ihole qualities, thlt fl:uu'd have grac'd a camp ?

NAorr,,. 'I hat too ar !..ft I lcarni'd. Unhappy mar.

Returning hcmewards by Mcliina's port,
Loaded with w.alth and honours bravely wen,
A rude and bcii"rous captain of the iea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought
The fl ranger fell, and with his dying breath
Dcclar'd his name and lineage. Miighty God !
'The Coldier cricl, my hbotilir ! Oh ! i.y brother '

l.ady Ran. His brother !
Aor.v. Yes; of the fame parenits horn;

-is only brother. ''lhey exchang'id ibrgivencl-
And happy, in my mind, was he th:t icld :
For many deaths has the l'urvivor lilt;:r'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he lits,
Or on some nameless tlream's untrodden bank.:,
And ruminates all (lay lMis dreadful tlate.
At times, alas! not in his perfct miind !
lHolds dialogues with his lox'd brother's g:ol ;
And oft each night tbfirlt,; his fullen couch,
To make rad orilbns (or hilm he flew.

L.ady Ran. To what myfteiious woes are mortals born !

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy peronbs ? did the parcnts live

Xlr,vo

Norv. No ; they were dead: kind heav'n hadclos'd

their eves
B.'ore their son had shed his brother's blood.

Lord Rn,. Ha. d is his iate : lor he was not to blame

There is a destiny in this ler.nge world,
Which oft decrees an un(l,..lrved doom!
Let f'cloolmen tell us why.---From whence these founds?

[T'Iru,;i/ets at a diflance.]

Eiter nt OFF ICER.

Offcer. rMy Lord,the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
ThAir valiant leader hails the noble RA N DoL'r H.

Lord Ran. line ancient gucft! does he warriors

lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

QOficer. No; worn with warftare, he resigns the rcvord.

His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. GI.ENALVON, go,

With hofpitaliry's molt ftiong request
Entreat the chief. ([Exit C;LENALVON .

Officer. My lord, requests are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord Ran. May victory fit on the warrior's plume !

Bravell of men ! his: fuLis and hzids are fafr,
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lye,
By mountains inaccelible fecur'd :
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
L:'ag-r to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancientworld:
Con'cann':rs they of indolence and gain;
Ilut flill lor love of glory, and of arm:,
lrone to encounter peril, an.l ro lift
,i\ginll: cachl firong ;,ntai;onilt ti:- spear.
I l go and I-I.cs tlc liero to my) brie;}

[I.xit R.\ :;no t I, H.

l.jnzet i.avly RA .nno Inp nnl Noitv.x,.

I.a ;'/ R/'n. 'I'l. lc olicr's loltilielCf, the pride antd porn i

Il vc:iin, awtbui \'ar, Nu v

. 1., 1i1ic,

l'r.:in')ort thy )'ou:li'ul nlinJ.

,\', . Ah ! Ihoull they not t
Llcel be lhe h.Aur i left my itllthr'a Iloufi !

I might

I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And llole obfcurelv to a pealant's grave.
Now if I live, with mighty chiefs I land ;
And, if I fall, with noble t'uit I lie.

Lady Ran. 'I here is a gen'rous spirit in thy breaff,

That could have well lultain'd a proud(r fortune.
This way swith me; under yon Ipreading beech,
Untecn, unheaid, by human (ye or car,
1 will amaze thee with a wond'rous ta!e.

A'orv. Let there be danger, laly, with the fccret,

'Ihat I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prose m)y laith. Command my tfword, my I'- :
Thele are the fol: pc'fl;,iions of poor No Kv A L.

Lady Ran. Knov,'tt thou thele gemr ?
A'Nr. Duril I belicve mine ey.s
I'd lay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady Ran. 'I hy l:athir' s lay'tf thcu ! al! they were

thy fathel's !

n'oorv. I law them once, and curiously enquir'd

Of both my parents whence such fIpkndor came ?
But 1 was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady Ran. Then learn of ne thou art not No RV A L'S

son.

N;orv. Not NORVA L'S ton!
Lady Ran. Nor of a flr.:r!;,rl sprung.

'cr-. Lady, uwho am I then ?
Lady Ran. Noble thou art
For neble was thy fire !

Norv. I v'.ill Ucllevc-
0 ! ttll me ic tlier ! Say, who vas my father ?

Lad v Ran. ]D) t C LA S
\ 0'vu. I ord 1)0 U c I. A, . hom to day I saw ?
L ady Rn Hiis younlnlger brother.
Je\'o) . And in )ouiilc! t ;i:'ip ?
LiIady Ran. A!;.i !
AXorv. You mak!e me rcn: ble-cighs and tears!
l.i\s myv bra \e lilther

Lady Ran. Ah! too brave inieed !
I-le tell in I-attle cre thyli,' v.:a born.

A'o,',. All me unl, 'ipy'! er 1 I \ tie light ?
lB t Iloe:; m1 nt rlier I e

r I . cuiIn e!ude,
F'm ioi m'y own fate, heri portion has been furrow.

!Lady

Lady Ran. She lives ; but waftes her life in conllant

woe,
\eeping her hulband (lain, her infant loft.

ATorv. You that are fkill'd so well in the fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their delliny, now have compallion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O ! tell me who, andl where my mother is !
Oppreft by a baie world, perhaps fhle bends
liencath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid
H-er son should give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confefli-s that hile's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword-
Who shall resist me in a parent's cause ?

Latly Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my

son !
I am thy mother, and the wife of DoUGLAS!

[Falls upon his neck.

NorvJ. 0 heav'n and earth, how wond'rousis my fate!
Art thou my mother ! Ever let me kneel !

Lady Ran. Image of DOUGLAS ! Fruitof fatal love!
All that I owe thy fire I pay thee.

,'ora. RefpcCt and admiration still possess me,

(C il:.ing the love and fondness of a son.
Ye't I ..i i:i :; to my htiumL:e parents.

Ui t (i;d :,n i lii lurpals the ret! of men,
:\: thou c. iltcl' all us W( i:n :kind ?

Ladv Ran. Aritl'. my Icln ! In me thou dost behold

Teii poor rc.mniils of eauty ol, c- aitlir'd:
'Tlhe Lt:t:::uI of 1li ti l s is coic already;
Fur lirro; Iliad,: Iiv Itinimir li.,lc awav.
Yet in n, I:iie I t t'., r'i .t thlv ftiler:
1 ii, (ves ,*;.' ',;. tit= ..al.s, .y louinetimcs

ilk, tl, clovi :'s, -;n ais Ilep'c r .'i . l:.' woa
Al 11i h tts wvith itTinlcls, or v. :'h ! . it aw'd.

.\ Ut'J. lovw didl he fa'l ? Surc 'iwas a bluoodlv rfild

\lt\\ hL [)),( .^., Idied. 0 I lhaen muchl to aill !

La y) Ra:ll. lerealtcr thou flial hear thu Icgthen'd

Oi a'l thy 1iither's and thy mother's woes.
Ac preflnt tl;ia : Thou art the rilght!ul hicir

Of

Of yonder caffle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH r, as my husband, holda.
But thou shalt not be wrong'd ; I have the power
To right thee fiill: Bcrble the king 'll knecl,
And ca:l Lord Do G LAS to ,p:orot his blood.

N'orv. '1 he blood of Do u(; I As will protec itetlf.
Lady Ran. But we lhall need both friends and favour,

boy

To wrest thy land and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinlfnan. Yet I thiink
My tale will move each gentle heart to pit)',
My liie incline the virtuous to believe.

Norw. To be the son of Do U(; I.AS is to nl

Inheritance enough. D-clare my birth,
And in the field I'll leek for fame and fortune.

Lady Ran. Thou dost not know what periL, and in-

juflice

Await the poor man's valour. 0 ! my son !
Thenobleff blood in all the land's abalh'd,
Having no lacquay but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, Doun LAS
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whillt thy indignant Ipirit fwell'd in vain!
Such contumely thou no more flalt bear:
But'how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Muff be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy ruftick follower's handl
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated betlbi'o
This caifual opportunity arore
O1 private conference. Its purport Inark;
l'or a; I there appoint we meet ag.aii.
I.ea;e me, my son ! and frame thy manners ti!l
To NORVA I.'s, not to nolle Do u rLAxs' [bite.

Norv. I will remecmber. Where is Noiv.\ L now
That good old m:n.

L.ady Ran. At hand conccal'(d he lies,

An ulelul witness. 13ut hew;re, my son,
Of yon GLENA LVON i in lii; g'ilty brcalt

Rc4id;.t

Resides a villain's fhrewdncfs, ever prone
To if'lle conje'ture. He hath griev'd my heart.

A'&r-v. lHas he indeed ? Then let yon talie GLE-

N ALVOJ
Beware of me. [rvit DOUGLAS.

illarrt L.adv RANDOL.I'

Ladv Rrn. '1 lhre I:urit the linothelr'c flame

O ! thou a'l r; hrouis and eternal King !
\Vho iithter n:' the fhrllcrlits arr cail'd,
Proret, mnv 'on !---'hy inlipiration, Lord .
1-ilih t:l'.II his )o:om withi that iaLcred iiic,
\N" li.:h ia th'e bre:its of hii ioreithers burn'd:
Set hi: on higih lkte them, that he may Ihine
T'he I:;r :nd glorv of his native land!
'I len let tie mnni(tcl ol death delcend,
And bear mr) v.illing spirit to i;'s p!c..
Yonder they come. low (! , itld .',:n mn find
l nchanging a!pects to c::incal ti. ir guilt '
\'hen I by reaion, and by jtiliicc ui, d,
Fu;l hardly can diIfTen-'e ,riri' ti:ee n;'n
in nature's pioiu. caus,.

Enter Lord R^A Do 1.1' i ant{ GLG . E ?.LVON.

l.crd in. Yon g::!lint cui.,,
(Of arms enainot ('d, ;. I -.,J dilc amims.

Ivady Rinni. lc no t, ny l.o d. by' hi

v xamplc fway'd:

;A iage the hulineti of' ro-ln'! Iow now,
And when )ou enter, Ipcak or '. r no more.

[r. .'i: 1:dy iRA N DOL rn.

,.,t#/l:est Lord RA.NDO .: ;I ;,il'' L :

I: ALVO) ..

Loid Run. 'l'islo by hlo

b 1 !
i k mien, hce voice,

her cee,
And her imipatiencc tio r gone, conl'lml

(,iet. Ile parttd l :im lih.r Iw : I.tl . me mount,

Amongfl the trees, 1 :.,,v lin !i.! '
! ,:.c

L ord Run,. F r

i .l i.< ]itl.i i: 'It l'

H .''sr rino.Ixn'di

'(,/, . o. loft .',., 1y I .r.!.

Lold R,,i. '\et Ili i

dh i:::.i!i'd

d.m1:.

In\irte a Vuni r. 1iu 'c.W'..:'l..i!miL ol ' v,
Alone to ml : li, r ; l t..' r

1.iJ,. ,h' l,,i,

'I ilis a ll l1 .'i(.i , I / ' ,i s t /I '.., ) l.i.e al'.L'.:l ft. c,
H er ni.I..Tt .ilt .1f. .il lsor tl.,' ' lw :tit,
M i.,lit bit.'t ;t ;iicio, , in a uiii.';m 'nl bi:'i :,

X'li,.C

Whore gentle con-ort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. MIT I LoDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, aser me, a woman wed,
Whole heart he knows he has not; tho' f(le brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her leem, like the night's fladowy queen,
Cold and contemplative ;-1-Ie cannot trult her:
She may, flfe will, bring flnamr and sorrow on him;
The worfr of sorrow and the worst of flames!

Glen. Yield not, my Lord, to llch ariiS.ing thoughts;

But let the spirit of an hulbind sleep,
''ill your own fInles make a liire concluion.
This billet must to blooming NotV.\ L go:
At the next turn awjits my truity Ify
I'll give it him refitted lfo his ml'teir.
In the close thicket tnke your lecret Iland;
The moon flincs bright, and your o, n eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou dost counlcl well.
Glen. Permit now to mnke one llight eity.

Of all the trcphiks v.hich \:i:i mortals boa't,
By wit, by valour, or by vililom won,
The first and f.gire't in a young nman'c eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Suscc.:lt'ul love
V ith gloiious lun.ea intoxicat: !'li mind!;
And the proud conqie: or in tliu :lpl move.;
Air-born, exalted above v il :a.r iIl.

I.ord Ran. And v.'!hat av.:'.is lid ii; :.ln ?
CGlen. Mu:lh, my lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young Noi v . L,
And with i.nnical dciilive counljl
Explore his liirit. If h. is no more
Than humble NORvK A 1., by thlv i:.':.or r:,; ,',1,
Brave as lihe is, he'll flrinl: aiolnl',, 1 I :iun inlc:
1Biu if he lie the l:hurirt' 0o tIl t:iir,
I.ov'd I'y the l1r't of L.a : .! ni'l's d;inim;,
]-1c'1l 1itt n upc;n ;ie, as thi I:.i tiurti
Upon the hIln:t i I l elar.

J.ord J,'i. ' 1 i, l :!i v .'.' thv:;:'lzt.
(/,in. \VI:cn v'e g, uv, loud, dl;':w i:.:.r. L;,t kt my

I.c,rl

H is cooling vi/lahl rlc'irin. .'..\ .' ' . O I,
t. .

L,~~~ .,\:.;;

ll.lnet GL E N A L VON'.

Gleul. 'Tis strange by hev'n !

That ihe should run tull ti t her fond career,
To one tf little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fitream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens it's courle. Even I did think her chaste,
W hose charirvy exceeds not. Precious fcxt
Whose deeds lalcivious pars GL ENA LV( N'S thoughts !

NOILVA app>eanrs.

His pnrt T love ;- he's in a proper mood
'ITo chide the thunder, if at himn it roal'i.
Has No k v A i. seen the troops ?

Nor.v. '1 he setting fun,

With yellow radiaince lightenr'd all the v.le,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm,
Cortiet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,
01 more than mortal siz7.e, town'ring they fieem'd
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

G'cn. 'Ihou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,
In l'un.ls more lofty, 1peaks of glorious war.

Awr,-v. If I :' ill e'er acquire a leader's name,

Mvyllpecch will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, anml youthful admiration
Vents itlelf' fretly; lince no part is mine
Oi'pruil:, pert'fining to the great in arms.

(G!en.You wrong yourlelf, brave fir; your martnij deeC1d

l-lave rank'd you kith the great: but mark me NOnRvAL;
Lord RA N 1) 0

L I''s favour now exatlts your youth

Above his velerans of tamous lervice.
L.et me who know thelie 1oldiers, counsel you.
Give. them all honour ; fciem not to comiandi ;
Elt. they will icarccly brook your la:. Ip)rung power,
Which nor alliancc prop;, nor hirth adorns.

Arr'a. Sir, I have been accnitom'd all my days

To hear and fpcak the plain and limple truthi:
And tho' I have been told, that there are menij
\Vho borrov. fiiencdfhip's rongut: to l;i.'l; thlir lseorn,
Yet in luchl lang;uae 1 am lintle Ikill'i.
Therefore I thank G LI NA LV o N lor his co'.n!l,
Altho' it (bounded harfiily. Why remind
\le of mny birth obscure ? VW'ihv lur my ow::r

With

With fich contemptuous terms?

Glen. i did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

ANorIv. My pride!
Gkn. Suppress it as you witn to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet for RA N DoLrPl'S fake
I will not leave you to its rafn diretion.
If thus you fwoll and riown at high-born men.
\'ill high-lorn men endte a flcpiher':' >u!.n '.

nrt-,'. A Ilhcpherd'.s scorn !
G'!n. Yc ; it you prtliim r

To bend on fo!dlir' th';etl dit;lailfil cry:s,
As if' vn took thie Ti"lreic of their min:is.
And t:iri in lecret, vou're no match tbr ime;
What will becor.e of vou ?

Aor-''. If thlis v.:rc told --- .'
I-I.lit thuc: no :e:rs for thv presiumptuous fllf!

Gtifn. Ha! Doit thou tiri.eatn mce
A'ov. Didi't thou not htal ?
CGlen. LUn^.;i!;ng:v I did ; a nollr f*c
Ilad not been cu-lrion'd thus. lui:t uch as thle-

Aor'. \&Wloml dofttiou thi;il: t;iei
Glen. N o i v A i..
NAorv. So I amn
And who is NoRV AL in GLENA I.VO1N's CVC ?

Glen. A pcalant's lin, a wandu7il: 1'.l: .ar- [v ;

At best no mnre, enit l
ii :e ak:; sK ti. tth.

Aorvr. [':lle as thol art. I oir thoul si;:' lt my ti ll:
G!ei:. Tbli rru:i ! ilourli a :.: ;i:,

l; e a. I;.cl

Is tlic vain oliuct.' L, c

ti li^:u to!.'l ') i, A

I : 1)I p
ii .

A.t,,,,. II I w;(rc c d:':'ril. , i:i,: l;.,uiil ul,

Prchaps I 1.(:;u!.l ILu.il:: it as I ,::n
1 i:c;ie .or, lon rl.' ,i ,-tiii. lt le umh!e N 1 \1.Lx t,
I of' a i:Cc-, xl.o) i t ix' r,.' i l,tI withl) dI ls.
IJid 1 nLi i, 1 to ie'.' li,' '!lfv. ' \,Iw x I,
/nlld r :!'.L tl;t.c <' t, ') lio n .

n :. il 0ll ,v ','x ,:l,
I'd '. ; t e' . v.'.t thou a, . I :ovl' ti l'. .;'l; .

G<tz. jo!ti t lihl. not l.IloW (. . . 1.
\ l..N , Lbn to

colinll nidl
T-.. thouf:uci {l:,\e ; il:; tcee ?

.'', .,, \ . ui'tn lno i.ore:

Dr\. .:.nd dei'

,. it.t '
lie. 1 cidl dcef Il

'rlr

To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RAN OLPIH.

Lord Ran. Hold, I command you both. Theman
Makes me his foe. [that fIirs

Norv. Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPIn.

Glen. Hear him, my lord; he's wonderous conde-
Mlark the humility of llepherd NoRVAL ! [icendins !

,Nr. Now you may fcoirin safety. (Sheaths iis Jkord.)
Lord Ran. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The caule of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

A'r--J. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you m.ich

.ly caule I plead nor, nor demand your judgment.
I hlulh to Ipeak; I will not, cannot speak
'h' oppiobrious words I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a subject's homage : but rv'n him
And his high arbitration I'd rject.
\\ ithin my bolom reigns another Lord;
Honour, lble judge and umpire of itlelf
If my free fpcech offend you, noble R. 3 o . H,
Revoke your favours, and let NonV A L go
11cnce as he came, alone, but not diflonour'd.

Lord Ran. Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
'1 lie private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this.
Nor-v. And I.

Enter SeRVANT.

Ser'-. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RAx DOL PH.
GlCc. NOItVAL,

I.ct not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RAN DOLIH.
Nor frowning anger, nor vet wrinkled hate,
Shall liaill my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;

C Nor

# ACT V. SCENE I.

Nor let our strife disturb the gentle dame.

A'or,. Tilink, not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again our strife is mortal.

ACT V. S CENE I.

T.e lYoodl.

Enter DOUGLArS.

ITHIS is the place the center of the grove.
Here stands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

I low 1weet and lolemn is this mid-night scene !
Tile silver moon unclouded holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little star.
The fanning weft wind Icarcely stirs the leaves;
The river rulhing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes filcnce with a htilly found.
In such a place as this at Ifch an hour,
Ifanceftry can be in aught believ'd,
Descending Ipirits have convcrs'd with man,
And told the fecrcts of the world unknown.

Enter Old NoRVAL.
Old norv. 'Tis hle. Cut what ir he should chide

me hence ?
ii; just reproajh 1 fear. [Do UGLAS turns andfeesl im.

Forgive, forgive,

Can'st thou forgive the man, the felfilh man,
Who bred Sir MIALCOLM'S. heir a fliepherd's son.

Dtug. Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:

Thy willi'd for pretence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou salt fliare,
iAnd ever honour'd with thy Dou GLAS live.

Old Norv. /nd do'st thou call me father ? 0 my Ion !

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderncfs Ib long conceal'd
The blollbm of thy youth.

Doug. Not wort the fruit,

That in the wilderness the bloflom blow'd.
Amongst the Ihepherds in the humble cote,

I Icarn'd

I learn'd some leflons, whick I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; anti when my valtals bow,
NORVAL Ihallfmooth the crested pride of Dou . LAS.

rTorv. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievouss arc my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

Do:.r Why should I leave them ?
A'o»r-. Lord RAx DOT.P and his kinfinan 'cck your
Dotue. How know'fl thou that ? Llile.
Norr,. I will inform vou how.

'When evcning came, I ieft the secret p!acc
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accultomed path
1' hitto the ca le leads. W\hilll thus I rang'd,
1 was alarm'd with unexpeaed founds,
Ofearneft voices. On the persons came:
Unfcen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord RAN DooLr' this,
And that GLEN A LVON : till of you they spoke:
And of the lady : threatening was their Ipeech,
Tho' but imperfcctly my ear could hear it.
' Fwas firange, they said, a wonderful difzov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

D9 y. Revenge ! lor what ?
'orv. For being what you are ;

Sir MA LCOnLm's heir: how else have you oflended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fit muling how 1 belt might find
Means to inform you ol' thcir wicked purFole,
But I could think of none: at lalt perplex'd
I illued forth, inconipalling the towr
With many a weary Itep and will:'ul look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let nor yoour too courageous Ipilit scorn
T'he caution which I give.

Doutf. I lforn it not.

Mly mnother warn'd ne of GLEN.\ LVON 's barenels:
lsut I will not lulfpect the noble RAN DOLPH.
In our encounter willi the ile alfallii,
I inmatked his bkavc dltennour : him I'll trust.

C' 2N rv.

Alorv. I fear you will too far.
Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: she ha:ll know
What thou haft told : Her counsel I will follow
Antl cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart ; your presence may prevent
Our interview.

Aore,. My blessing refl upon thee !

O may heav'i's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes be near thee still;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine ! [Exit Old NOR.

Doug. He loves me like a parent;

And mull not, Ihall not lore the Con he loves,
Altho' his son hasfound a nobler father.
Eventful day; how haft thou chang'd my state!
Once on the cold, and winter fladed fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious stars! high heav'n's resplendent hot !
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wish !
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host !
Before he speaks it out I will accept
Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DoUGLAs die.

Enter Lady RAN DO LP I.

Lady Ran. My Ibn I lheard a voice
Doig. - Thhat voice was mine.
Lady Ran. Didlt thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

That thus in dulky fades, at mid-night hours,
By tlealth the nothler and the Ton (hould meet ?

[Embrtning him.

Doug. No; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady Ran. Sad fear and melancholy fill divide

'The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I adviti.

Doug. First let me tell

-,'hac

What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady Ran. My heart forebodes some evil!
Dotug. ' is not good-

At eve, unseen by R A NoL PRH and GLE ^ A Lvo¢,
The good old NoRV A L in the grove o'er-heard
Their converfaton: ott they mlention'dl me
xVith dreadful threatnings; you they Ibmetimes nam'd.
'' was Itrange, they said, a wonderful di.cov'y;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady Ran. Detfnd us gracious God! we are betri.y'd;

They have found out the lecret of thy birth;
It mult be ob. That is the great dilcovery.
Sir N'l. L COLM'S heir is come to claim his own;
An.l they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
A;n'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour to break
I nto the chamber where they think thou flnep',.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to ltve thee!
Fly to the camp my tbn !

D)ornL. And leave you here ?

No: to the caltle let us go together,
Cnll up the ancient servants of your house,
\\ ho in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your Ion.
It in the breats of men one spark remains
Of thcred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your caule will arm. I ask but few
To drive thole spoilers from my father's house.

Lady Ra? i7. 0 nature, nature! what can check th force?

T'I'h genuine orF..pring ns the daring DOUG LAS
I;ut ruih not on dll ruction : f've thyltlf.
A nI I am lafr. '1 o me they mean no harm.
ThI lt.ly but rilks thy preciouslife in vain.
'I'h:t \Nin-iing path condudts thee to the liver.
(Crols %where thou leeil a broad anil beaten way,
W\ hich running ecallward leads thee to the camp.
Inllant demand admittance to 1. ord 11oW L SS.
Shew him thlie jewels, x hich i;:i brother wore.
'Ihlv look, thy voice, will mike hi i tfeil the truth,
\Vlich I by certain proof will s)on contirm.

D'ug. I yield me and obey hut vet my h'art
Bletls a: this parting. Somcthing iltd me f'ay

C J .\:;l,

And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'l.
Our foes are two; no more : let me go forth,
And fee if any fhieid can guard GLENALVON.

Lady Ran. If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft

Thy father's mem'ry, think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a mod fearful season. War and battle
1 have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper lets:
To day I've found tlce. Oh ! my long loft hope!
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ht the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou fbalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world ! my son, remember me !

Doug. What (hall 1 f y ? how can I give you comfort?

The God of battles of my life difpore
As may be best for you ! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The post of fate unfhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confers the genuine strain.
If in this strife I fall, blame not your Ton,
Who if he lives not honour'd must not live.

Lady Ran. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

[Embracing.
And as high heaven hath will'd it all must be.[feparates.

Lady Ran. Gaze not on me, thou wilt miitake the
I'11 point it out again. [path;

[7r/tl n they are fepn-aling, enter fromn e
he woo

Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
l.ord Ran, Not in her presence.

N>;.:~ow~~-- ·Glen.

Glen.

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran No: I command thee stay.

I go alone : it never /hall. be laid
'lhat I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.
[G LENA LVO N makes fonmefleps to the Jfae fide of

the stage, Itens and speaks.]

Glen. Demons of death come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the hulband both muff die.

[Lord RA NDOLPH . behind the fenes.]

Lord Ran. Draw, Villain ! draw.
Doug. Aflail menot, Lord RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov'ft thy self. [Clashing of /tords..]

[GLENALVON running out..)

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RAN DOLPH, at the oppofitefide of the age,

faint and breathle/s.
Lady Ran. Lord RANDOLPH hear me, all Ihall be

thine own:
But spare ! O spare my son!

Enter Do uG I AS ,with a fvord in each hand.

My mother's voice !
I can protect thee fill.

L.ady Ran. He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise!
But lure I saw thee fall.

Doug. It was G.EN ALVON.

Just as my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me: but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee ! Ah; thou'rt wounded, 0

my child,
How pale thou look'ft ! and flhall I lore thee now ?

Doug. Do not despair : I feel a little faintness ;
I hope it will not lafl. [Leans upon hisfwiord.]

I.ady Ran. There is no hope !

And we muff part ! the hand of death is on thee I
O my beloved child ! O DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS I

[Do U G LAS growing more and tnore faint.]
Doug. Too Coon we part: I have not long been

DOUGLAS.

O defciny!

O defitny ! hardly thou deal'il with me:
Clouded and hid, a tiranger to myself,
In low and poor obfcuritv I. liv'd.

Lady Ran Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end i;Le

this ?

Doug. 0 had fallen as ms brave fathers fell,

'lurning wilth fatal arm the tide of battle !
Like them I lIhould have tinil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand !
Cut off from nature's and from glory's courle,
M\ hich never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady R'an. Hear, jutlice ! hear ! are there the fruirs

of virtue ? [Douc r. s falls.
Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue fliall Ipeak of

me. -

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May.yetconjecture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who Ihall comfort thee ?

Lady Ran. Defpa;r ! despair !
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my mother [Dies.

Enter Lord R.xnoL Pt andl A N. A.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of tiuth, have

pierc'd my heart,

1 am the Itain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave cleli\ erer survives
The traitor's lvword

An4na. Alas ! look there, my lord.
Lord RaI. 'The mother and her son ! How curlt I

am !

WXVa I the calie ? No : I was not the cnu;e.
Y'on matclelels \illainr did reduce my blul
To frantic jealoulv.

Anna. hMly lady lives:

The agnny of grief hath but lupprel
A while her pow-ers.

Lord Razn But my ddliverer's dead !

The world did once esteem Lord RANDOr. n wei,
Sincere of heart, for lpotlefs honour 'am'd :
And, in my eally days, glory I gniall'

Ik-ncult

Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now palt the noon of life, ihame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RA DO LPH basely ftab'd Sir MA LCOLM'S heir.

[Lady RA no L. H recovering.
Lady Ran. Where am I now ? still in this wretched

world !

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguilh; but youth's strength,
With hope's assistance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the objeat now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Making a spectacle, a tale of me,
To awe it's vassal, man.

Lord Ran. 0 misery!

Amidst thy raging grief I must proclim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thy innocence !
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou thin'ft it.

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing ? My son ! my son !
My beautiful ! my brave ! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidRf a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my hulband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead ! A little while
Was I a wife ! a mother not so long I
What am I now ?- I know.-- But I (hall be
That only whilll I please; for such a son
And such a husband make a woman bold. [Rrns out.

Lord Ran Follow her, AN N A : I myself would follow,
But in this rage nie mult abhor my presence.

[Exit AN N A.

Enter Old No Rv A ..
NJ,-:- I heard the voice of woe ; heaven guard my

childt !

Lord Rrn. Already is the idle gapig croud,

'I'Tle fiitetul vulg.r, come to gaze on iRANDOLPrI.
3'gu".c. Norv.

AIor'v. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crufli down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 nobletll youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlelr and bravetl spirit,
'1 hat ever blest the world I Wretch that I am,
\' ho lhw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it !
Yet never was by all thy virtues vwon
To do theejuftice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now !
T hefe are the hairs that flould have lfrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DoUGLAs.

[7 ears his hair, and throws hinmfelf upon the

groundl.

L.ord Ran. I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive:

My crest is fallen For thee I will appoint
A place of relt, if grief will let thee test.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curst, curst GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror the felon dy'd.

Enter \ N NA.

Anna. My Lord, my Lord !
Lord Ran. Speak: i can hear of horror.
Alnna. Horror indeed !
Lord Ran. MAT I LA ?
Anna. Is no more:

She ran, flie flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice fie gaii'd.
lBeneath who:e low'ring top the river iflls
Ingtlpll'd in rifted rocks: thither (he came,
A¶ fearlels as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down---

Lord Ran,n 'lTwns ! alas! 'twan I

That fill'd her breast with fury ; drove her down
The precipice of death ! Wrctch that I am I

,jnli,i. 0 had you lhen her last delpliringl look !
tUpcn the brink Ihe dlood, and call her eyes

Down

Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, teeming to lay,
Why am I forc'd to this? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the paflion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RAN DOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, anil with the voice of fate
Denounce mydoom. am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
.lIe turn aside mult threaten worse than death.
'I hou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never shall return.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

(60 )
EPI LOGUE

Spoken by Mr. BARRY.

A N
Epilogue I a 'd; but not one Twcrd

Ourn bard will 'write. He svowus 'tis molo alt' frd

W'ith comic zwit to contradict the firain
Of0 tragedy, and make your forlorus 'vain. '
Saduly heJ;,ys, that tity is the he/, '
'The nobiefl pafjion of the humaln breafl: ;' '
Fir' 'when its jacredjtreeams the heart o'er-floow,
In gufles pleafitre .with the- lile of wuoe;
-nd livhen its 'caves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave ibehind them fitch a golden foil,
That there the virtues 'without culture grow,
There the fvweet blo];'nis If /affedion LoIzu.
'The/e 'were his ,word;l ;--void of deliJdive an t
Ifelt them ; for he fpke them from his heart.
'ogr tuill I now attempt, tuith tuitty folly,
'To chaJnfe awy e/leflial ,nelanclihc.
