lrs Banrr: ,,/(., ,nrAr /'Ladl-Randolph.

-'7jU- .-. v "

7

D O

U G L A

A
T R A G E D

Y.

As it is Afted at the
TH E A T R E S - R O Y A L

I N
Drury-Lane and Covent-Garden.

Written by Mr. H 0 M E.
Non ego fum vates, fed prifcius confcius asvi.

1/

so.

L O N D O N:
Printed for HARRISON and Co. No I8, Paternoller-Row; and So0d, likewise, by

J. WENsMAN, Fieet-Street; and all other Bookeller

,I1 DCC LXXX,

k,~d

J~ i ~
'AFe

# PROLOGUE.

# EPILOGUE.

# Dramatis Personæ.

P R O L G U E. Tit i emie to rcEradi.E re frli

Of tragedy, ard ruke)ow-rr frraw vaia.
T arr.rt rtists, wr - it:S5 I trade =as arms, Sadiy befays, list pity is the trj

ArJ itr : !Lv'd -.tfr f hb-r c:t, l, n.i r.d str.i es lpati-tr. of the bur.ran breaf :

, -:dgi. r sre ia fair '.

i.s e For ser. it s

fatredftreamd the heart o'erfi.uw

~J iv: rb. ;rd cf at.art Piery rm.-.' In tPs Pleas rez
- b te ti-c of wee;

r:.

-. cr .d f Dc.!s.i r&.'

ilstfri':sf fe.s ..d -wbh it's wav-es reire, likc tbofte f Nile,

J- ri / R. te aUd Cartcar e-tJr re./r ftey lere -'e lird bit Jrcb a gliretn fil,
F-.r. ge It are irigbt jr r: ti Bri,:ifre, Tbat tb'rt the i, irtes -vitbhot culture grow,
A.d :.s -et c-, s

- -=. st- f .-e. Tihe, tre -fret blJffirw f as H ira biomw.

lfkrb. : f:c.ft Ce ed ;te rsrr-:r' d:..w, Thbee were his vi*rd; v-id cf de/f ve art

p 'prr. ter Pitr.i frsm hi, trer.'s t.b. I flt ther: fsr be p'ke themfrsm his beart.
Btsarw. ;i'H rtsr::, r?.'vr5Lr:es-ght ad feJl, A'rrwi il Itr.v attemtpt, with wittyf clly,
Ti- et w

rrr r:l5 .- :-k c e:r -esl: To chaj: away cell.ial

r.

e5lars ly.

eT-ig ma1 a lbtSy fes ;

w f aicd W -V, _

etrshie jr rate. is

a .'.nr a'! sis d'.

t .' .

-.

)Jle: Pie-y -=Te g'd, ds y'd i:s rir: cr ecrs peer,
Fsi ca.. rtDs.lfssE. lh i .óis Scstr fjfpar,; '
i.Ld cvb:'i Orr. D:igla^ rt-ade : ii-.g biss e,
Far D.-cgat, Piorey trt his Ertil JIw. .

h' . '

'-.

E£ p!d t;.i- r-ti es

i y werffate, -;- sDramatis Perion .

SIer, irs-'d r c

/isrre et tecb eUt6r's gate:

7h r ó/: 'd the car4fj, at r6e risidrigt 6a r,
aFr icm wh:ie ame ltad l::i it's frr~tf t:wer. MI E N.

'This rE;r. D-Ls :Ja-p-:r e. i: claics j
l".f'a! sa =tire! pitysl'iejw rt.aes: Lo.BD R.AXDOLPH.
7Le si; r f 6_r wss in.duigert bear, L GLENALVON.
i.dwd crty-,r Cuppliant allb ¢ Aegs- a teaco
A :.d '-neTyt',re Gja-l*iar all seeegs-a sett Stranger; NOrVAL; DrGL.c.,
I" r-;j.dr;:, :liels; rad bles teIfr. d
S.ct Er:ij tr 'btafit,: rS e Pgie, kid P rifoner Oid NoPvAL.

Servants, -c.

E P IL O G U E W M E N.
AN e#llrEI t.'d. t e -trr-t werd MASTILDA, LADY RA.NDOI.P:.

Oar bard !l -r.:e. tie v.:ws 'tis =lfi a- AisA.
fard

# ACT I.

D O U G L A S.

A C T I I The storm of war that gathers o'er this land t

If I Ihuuld perish by the Danilh sword,
SCENE, the Courl of a Cajle, frurroundedwith Matilda would not Ihed one tear the more.

1J7ocds. Lady R. Thou dost not think so: woefulas I ams

Enter Lady Randolph. I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
Lady R. YT E woods and wilds, whose melan- But whither go'it thou now ?

choly gloom Lord R. Straight to the camp,

Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth Where every warrior on tip-toe lands
The voice of sorrow from my burlting heart, Of expectation, and impatient alks
Farewel awhile: I will not leave you long; Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
For in your thades I deem some fpiiit dwells, The Danes are landed.
Who from a chiding fream, or groaning oak, Lady R. Oh, may adverse winds,
Still hears, and answers to Matilda's moan. Far from the coat of Scotland drive their fleet!
Oh, Douglas ! Douglas i if departed ghofta And every soldier of both holts return
Are e'er permitted to review this world, In peace and safety to his pleafint home!
Within the circle of that wood thou art, Lord R, Thou fpoak'lt a woman's, hear a war..
And with the pallion of immortals hear'1R rior's wilh:
My lamentation: hear'it thy wretched wife Right from their native land, the tformy north,
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft. May the wind blow, till every keel is fi'd
My brother's timelelsdeath I seem to mourn; Immoveable in Caledonia's tlrand!
Who perilh'd with thee on this fatal day. Thena hall our foes repent their bold invasion,
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address And roving armies hlun the fatal Ihore.
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard. Lady R. Warldetef : but war with foreign foeer
Oh, disregard me not; though I am call'd Whose manners, langu'ge, and vhofe looks are
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine. Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful, [trange,
Incapable-of change, affection lies As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave. A river here, there an ideal line
But Randolph comes, whom fate has made my lord, By fancy drawn, divides the fitter kingdoms.
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead. On each fide dwells a people similar,

Enter Lord Randolph. As twins are to each other, valiant botl,
Lard R. Again these weeds of woe! Say, doll Both for their valour famous through the world.

thou well, Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,

To feed a pallion which consumes thy life? And, if they muff hae war, wage dillant war,
The living claim fame duty: vainly thou But with each other fight in cruel cotn d.
Beftow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead. Gallant in ltrife, and noble in their ire,

Lady R. Silent, alas! is he for whom I mourn: rhe battle is their pallime. They go forth

Childless, without memorial of his name, Gay in the morning, as to summer sport;
He only now in my remembrance lives. [anguih! WVhen ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,

Lord R. Time, that wears out the traceofdeepelt Ihe youthful warrior is a clod of clay.

Has pall o'er thee in vain. Would thou wer't not rhus fall the prime of either hapless land;
Compos'd of grief and tcndernefs alone And such the fruit of Scotch and Englilh wars.
Sure thou art not thedaughter of Sir Malcolm: LordRr I'll hear no more this melody would
Strong was his rage, eterial his resentment A soldier drop his (word, and doff his arms, [make
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear Sit down and weep the conqueis he has m ruri
That Douglas' son in the fame field was flin. Yea, like a monk, sing relt and prace in hcav'rn

LadyR. Oh' rake not up thealhes ofmy fathers: ro fouls of warrirrs in his battles lain.

Implacable rcfentment was the crime, Lady, far wel; 1 leve thee nlt ali.ne
And grievous has the expiatibn been. Yonder comes one wivofe love makes duty light.
Contending with the Douglas, gallant lives [Exit.
Of either house were lofti my anceltors Enter Anna.
Compell'd, at lat to leave their ancient feat rn.a Forgive ite ralanels of your Anna's love

i

On l ivio:'s pleasant banks; and now, of them Urg'd by afit-dion, I have thus preotm'd
No heir is left. Hi1 they not been so llern, Tr interrupr your fillit;ry thrughts,
I had not been the las of all my race. And wsrn y uv of the Sours that you ner;eCl,

Lord R. Thy grief wrefs to it's purpnoes my And lor in rad::ef.

I never ail:'d of thee that ardent love, [svords. Lady R So t,, lose my hours,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns. Is all tle use I wish to nake of t;me. [fate;
Decentaffctlion, and complacent kindness, Arar. To blanm thee, la.y, fuies not wish my
Were all I wilh'd for; but I wilh'd in vain. B t sure I am, since ne.lt firfr prey'd on man,
hence with the Icf regiet my eyes bheold Never did filter thus a .ot'.:er mcurn.

Az

What had your fdrrows been if you had loll, As women wi.to be who love their lords,
In early youth, the husband of your eart ? lit who durii tell my father The good priel:

Lady R. Oh! .' ho join'd o;:r hands, my brother's ancient tutor,
Ana,. H, ve I diltrs'd you with officious loved h

Malcolm, in tile battle feil:

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fatre They two alone were privy tu the marriage.
Forgise me, lady: humble though I am, On Glence and concealment I rcfolv'd,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune: Tfill time Ihouid make my father's fortune mine.
So fervently I love you, that t) dry That very night on which my son was born,
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life a,. ay. My nurse, the only confidatr I had,

Lady R. VWhat Power diret:d thy uncnnfciousi Setoutwvith me to reach her filer's house:
To speak as thou haltdone ? to name- [tongue lBut nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,

arr.ea. I know not; Or heard of, Anna, fice that fatal hour.

But since my words have made my miltrefs tremble, My murder'd child ! had thy fond mother sear'd
1 will fueak fono more; but elent mix The loss ofthee, The had loud fame defy'd,

fly tears with her's. Defpis'd her father's rage, her fathe's gricf,
Lady R. No, thou /halt not be li!ent. And wander'd with iliee through the ftcrning world.

I'll truit thy faithful love, and thou lhalt be ASi;. Not fern, nor heard of! then perhaps he
Henceforth th' inflruCed partner of my woes, lives.
But what avails i ? Can thy feeble pity Lady R. No. It was dark December; wind and
Roll back the flood of never-cbbing time? Had bea all night. Across the Carron lay [rain
Compel the earth and ocean to give up The deftin'd road; and in it's swelling flood
Their dead alive ? My faithful servant perifh'd with my chi;d.

Anna. What means my noble mifrefs ? [been, Oh, hapless son! of a molt hapless lire!-
Lady R. Didil thou not ask what had my sorrows But they are both at reft; and I alone

If I in early youth had loil a hufhand ?- Dweil in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'p, Like a gui:t-troubled gholt, my painful rounds 3
Mantled with wounds, the hulband of my youth; Nor has defriteful fate permittrdme
And in some cavern of the ocean lies The comfort efa solitary forroe.
My child and his. 'Though dead to love, I was compell'd to wed

nnar. Oh ! lady mofl rever'd l Randolph, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words And Randolph now poffllnes the domains,
Deign to unfold. lThat by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;

Lady R. Alas ! an ancient feud, Domains, that should to Douglas' fin have giv'n

Hereditary evil, was the source A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed, Such were my soothing thoughts, a hile I besvail'd
That my brave brother should in battle save The flugliter'd father of a Ion unborn.
The life-of Douglas' son, our hotfe's fe : And when that fun came, lile a ray from heavenr
The youthfulwarriors vow'd eternal friendship: Which shines and disappears; alas! my child !
To fee the vaunted flRer of his friend, How long did thy fond mother gras thie hope
Impatient, Douglas to Balarmo came, Of having thee, she knew not how, refior'd.
Under a borrow'd name.--My heart he gain'd; Year after year hath worn her hope aw:ay;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd: But left frill undiminilh'd her deftre [of life,
iMv brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage. Area. The Iand, that spins th' uneven thread
Thtce weeks, three little weeks, with wings of May fnr.oth the length that's set to come of yours.

' down, -Lady R. Not in this world. I have confidcr'd well

Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd It's various evils, and on whlom thev fall.
To fight his father's battles; and with him, Alas! how oft does goodness wound i:flif!
In Ipite of all my tears, did Malcolm go. And fiveetaffccAion prove the fprirngrf woe.
Scarce were they gone, when my stern fire was told Oh ! had I died when my lov'd hulband fel !
That the false firanger was lord Doula.s' son. Had fume good angel op'd to me the book
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword, Of providence, and let me read my life,
And qocftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, tliint, M y heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Kneeing beneath his sword, fatiut'ring I took Oi ils, which one by one I have edur'd. [are,
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would Aa., That Power, whole minilcrs'good angels
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity! Hlth Thut the book, in mercy to mankind.
Thou sirs of virtue:, let no mortal leave Iut we must leave this theme: Glenalvon comes;
Thy o.n-var' path ! although the earth ihould gape, I saw him bend on )ou his thoughtful eyes,
And from the gulph of hell deltruiain cry And hitherwards he lo,. ly falks his wav.
To take dcidimulition's w:rtding way. Lad, R. I viil avoid him. An ungracious person

An-: . Ai:s i ho:. fe. of woman's fearful ;ind Is doubly il:kfome in an holr like this.

Durfi own a truth so hardy! Arr. r. , 'h Ipeaks my lidy thus of Randolph's

Lady R. The liri truth heir.

Js caioell to avow. This mo-al le:rn, L.adJ R. Because he's not the Ieirof Randolph'3
This precious moral, from my tr-gic tale.- Sub:.' and Ihre d, he oflers to manlind [virtues.
In a few days the dreadful tidings a:r.e An artificial ;n.ge of himicif:
Th.t D;,uga.s and my brother both were fliin. And he witl ease can varv, to the safe
liy iord! my life! my huilbnd!-Mighty Heaven! Of .i:i.'ett men, it's tsatu-es. Self-denied,
\What had I done to merit such afiiidl'n ! An. miecr ofhis appe:ites he seems:

Anra. Myl, dearclt lady i m'ary a tale of tears Bilt his fierce naiure, iii:e a fsx clhdin'd up,

I've lil.,n'd ro; 'butjever did I hear Watches to feizs ur:cen ihe wifl'd.for prey.
A tale si ft d as r!lis: rN-v-r .e-e -e aire srlue Onisad fie ill,

L i1'R. In tr e irft .ays j As .i G;cn: -.rn's inr"ir;t i.g mind.
Of my diilrading gri:s, I found mvyfci f - ict; l.c '.;:i .! :-,is in ;.ar

# ACT II.

And flands aloft in these unruly times. Lard R. That it fares well, thanks to tils gallalte
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter. youth,
Stay, and detain him till I reach the cafle. Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!

[Exit Lady Randolph. Ai down thewinding dale I walk'd alone,
Arna. Oh, happiness! where art thou to be At thecrofs way four armed mcn attack'd ms:

found'? Rovers, I judge, from the licclitions camp,

I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty, Who would have quickly laid Lord liadolph lo-r,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur and in wealth array'd Had not this hIra.e lnd generous lIlaer conic
Nor doa thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell, Like my good ongl, in the hour of frc,
EIfehad this gentle lady mils'd thee not. And, mocking canger, rmde my ioes his o:,n.

I . Enter Glenalvon. They turn'd upon him h but his atirve arm

Glen. What doftthou mue on, meditating maid3 Struck to the ground, from whence they rote no

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer, The fiercefc twoi tbeothers fld amain [morce
On earth thou fand'ft, thy thoughts afcelld to And left him mad'er of the bloody siel.

heaven. Speal, Lady Randolph: upan btau)'a^ tongue
Annai. Would that I were, c'enasthou fay'l, a Dwell accsnts piazlirig ro the brae and bold.

. seer, Speai, no'c le ame,

n ad thanlk himl for thy lord.

Tn have my doubts by heavenly vision cler'd 1 Lady R. My lord, I .nnlot fp-l swh' .t nowv i f;el.
Glen. What dolt thou doubt of? What haft thou My lcarc o'erflaws with gratiture to [leav'n,

to 'do And to this noble youth, wvho all ulknlovn

With fubjerts intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty, To you an.i yours, deliberated not,
Cannot be queftion'd: think of these good gifts; Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave,
And then thy contemplations will be pleafng. Fought on your lide, aga.inil fach fearrul odds;

A.na. Let women view yon monument of woe Have we not learn'd of him whom ve fhoald thanl:?

Then boat of beauty: who so fair ar she? Whom call ihe saviour of Lord Randolph's life;
But I mul follow; this revolving day LordR. Iaic'd thatquefion, and :e anf\cer'd not:
Awakes the memory of ler ancient woes. But I must know ivho my deli erer is ;

[E.it Anna.' [To the Stranger,

Glen. [Solrs.] So !-Lady Randolphfliuns me: Strang. A low born man, of parentae oblcue,

I'll woo her as the lion waoes his brides. [by and bv Vho nought calo boas: uct his dcire to be
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord A soldier. and to g, in a name in arms.
Of there rich valleys, and a chitfnfpow'r. LrdR. Whoe'er thou art, trv spirit is ennilbled
The season is molf apt my foudinlg flcfs By t;e great King of kings i thou art o:dain'J
'Vill not bh heard amidlf the din of arms. And lampt a heio by the fovereii, linld
Randolph has liv'd too long: his better fate Of nature t blu li not, flover of' modcly

ald the afcenldant once, and Ikept me down i As well 2a valoLr, to declare thy birth.

When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came, Stra.g. M. niame is Norval: on tie Grampi'en
Refcu'd, .and had the lady for iirs labour; My father fee's his flocks i a frugal swain, j'ihil
I 'fcap'd unknown; a fender confola!ion ! Whose con!tant cir-r were to incrraf hii- toure,
Heav'n is my witnefj that I do not love Ard kecp his unly ln, mfe!l-j t h.m.-.
To Ibw in peril, and let others reap For I hal heard of ulatles, and I lone'd
Thejocund harven. Yet I am not safe: T ' ft;li,;v, to tl:e field fme vwai like lo'd;
By love or something like it, Rung, inflam'd, And Hieav'n soon granted what my file cenv'd-
lMadly ! blabb'd my panion to his wife, 'iris moon, which rnoe lar nlight round as m',; lil-!.,
And she has threaten'd to acquaint him of it. I-d not yer fill her h'risi wlsci, bI hrir.iSi:,
The way of woman's will I do not know: A hban. or tircrc barbarians from iie !.i '
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly. IRlI C Ii : tn,.t do.an upn tie
I will not live in fear; the man 1 dread S jseer:l oer si ck a;d heric. ' lit I.ier. ft- :
Is as a Dane to me: ay, and the mar. For re-i-, and so r f!rccour. I a'hie
Who tlands betwixt me and my chiefdfiRe. 'irh h b. ; ! b;v, an qivecr fculi ofarro.:s
No bhr but he; she has no kinfran near; MPlicr'.! abou :the enemy, and ;zrk'd
No brther in his ffler's quarrel bold ; Ti.e rr'.d 1ca tooki; ten h:s''.: to mnl f.ienodi
And for the righteous cause, a flranger's ceufe, 'i'"nm, i:h as oo of ufi'At t's zn::r'!:
I know no chief that will defy Glinalvon. I ine: ad'r.cing. i'hre l:;r :'t I Ce.i

Tii' ..eo'erto.ok the fpgil-ca::cnmler'd 're.

/#; *2S^rewo ssr#Zverwaoreswioe^. Yse tooU*t,: snd COIllalr c'.!. E e < lrol-ds V!'3 UL,
-, n

[An Anroi: from my i..;: hid pcerc'd tF.ir cher,
A C T i. Who:'orct thlar day ;ir arn:s ':'':c :;' ' I

R-tur;::n.; hn:ne n t.iummp!, i G i ai:.'

S C E N E, a Ccurt, e. The . i:he rd' s

l! ,; r; a.g .eard
E:tcer Servants axd a Strarger rat er Dsr, arnd ,hat .ur good :.;ilg had su!r.nmon'd c it: ;-.: .

Lady Randolph and Annaat arnsler. jTo lea th- r arr.ors to tie C'rrln 1;-

Lady . t 7THAT means this clamour? Stran- I leftn) :'-troh's norl:, and :o;G:
\;:!' rr.e

'V ger, speak fcure; jAc hofn lfvar;

s o ondic ia y ,i;.:

-Hat thou been vrong'd ? Have these rude men pre- IYon trecnbling :o .:ard, hbo tf: :i.,k i.is .ro.er.
To' vex tle v.eary traveller on his way ? fum'd Jojsurniying wi; this isrenr, .r- .;f -.-..

ifi Sero. By us no dranger ever ful7er'd rong : And, Heaven direclce, cnmte ;i :s da o do

This ma wvith outcry v ild has call'd us fortih; The happy deed that ,!s r

m.y hr.io:c n-;..

So fo.e afraid ho cannot speak ihis fears. Lecd R. He is .s wis r-'. '.' ..
E-tsr Lord Randolph ard a yrng ra:, 'uwit tbeiri Wi:h such a g.alaznt odelv rehI::.'S

Swsrds dra-rn ard /lSij. Miny brhavse dlivs:er L thou d;it n en:r jro .
Lad) R. N;t vain the eilrnger'sf als' Hw frcrs sA noblei lifr, nj in a monarch's lig!

my lord? ' Coatend vi';it p:r' . fr e .r-i'

1- wnil ref et thee mr our Seottih king, 1 How blest the mother of yon gallant Norali
V'h'oft vaiGant fpirli ecer valour lov'd.- She for a living hulband bore her pains,
toi! my Me.tila!t wherefore Rfits that te'r? And heard him bleis her when a man was born:

L^dy R. I cannot fay- for various afftetions She urs'd her smiling infatt on her breafll

And ifranely mingled, in my befon fell; jTended the child, and rear'd the plealing boy:
Yet each of them may well command a tear. She, with affechion's triumph, saw the youth
J joi trsta thil art safe; and I admire In grace and comeliness lurpafs his peers;
lim and h: fabrt-ne. a

ho arh wrounght thy fafery. Whilst I to adead hulband bore a son,

OSfccue and friendless, he the army fcught j And to the roaring waters gave my child.
Bent cpan peril, in the ronge of death nr. a. Alas! als ! why will you thus resume
Ref&ov'd to hent for fame, and with his sword Your griefafreth? I thought that gallant youth
To gain difiinEion, which his birth denied. Would for awhile have won you from your woe.
In this att:em: unknown he might have prifh'd, On him intent you gszed, with a look
Acd gain'd with all his svlour, but oblivion. o . Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Now grc'd by thee, Lis virtne serves no more Has deign'o on other objects to beltow. [mine eye
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope Lady.R. Delighted, f-y'fb thou? Oh ! even there
Hi sEand. ccerniceODus i fame and greet renown Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow
Are brought within the co3mpaf of hii fsord. I thought, that had the son of Douglas liv'd,
tC this my mind refitcr:d, whil.i you spoke, He might have been like thisyoung gallant franger,
And biets'! the woncer-wrrking hand ns Hcaven. And pair'd with him in features pnd in shape.

L-dSR. PcnsEadgrateuil everarethv houghts In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
',:y eei.'s al fo'I.:-v where thou po;nt'ri the wa. - Myfboy with blooming Norvai miglt havenumber'd.
iNct to mnfrif, ar.d eual to Genalvorn, Whillt thusl rus'd, a spark from fancy fell
in honour 2nd command, fCail Norral be. iOn my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness

:,r. I .rsr cn: how to thank you. .ute I amn, For this oung stranger wand'ring from his home,

In tI-ech anc manners: n-v:r till this hour i And like an orphan cafl upon my care.
St-od I in fcch a presence; yer, my lcrd, [bold! I will protest thee, said I to myself,
There's omecrhing in my brea.i, which mak'es mej With all my power, and grace with all my favour.
To fay, thst Norn a ne er will shame thy favcur. I .4er.. Sure Heav'n will blef so gen'rousa resolve.
Lr;dj R. I oill be frorn c h u wilt not. Thou; You mufl, my noble dame, exert your powers

sha:; b e You must awake: devices will be fram'd,

!y kni kh:; and ever, as tho doll t-day, I And arrows pointed at the breaftof Norval.
W ith h-r.- y v- alr gu ar the iif: of Randolph. Lad R. Gienaivon's false and crafty head will
Ls-d 3: Weli ha:' t.ou fooke. Let me forbid Againfi a rival in his kinsman's love, [work

ep-y. ' [To Norval. If I deterhim not; I only can.

-es ore bty cbrcrs r' t; y hgbh desert Bod as he is, Glenalvon will beware
O'er-ops c-r Erair-:e. I mu'-u:: rc-cd, How he pulls down the fabric that I raTe.
As w2s :at ri i::s.cei, to the camp. l'il be t!:e arift ofycung Norval's fortune.
Sct.e of my 'rain i fie arc ferdi.g hi:her, 'Tis p!eafng to admire ! most ape was I
]Fn2:ie-r, cocb!cst'. f their lore's deela. To this at.-ion in my better days i
Go with r., Nc:T;

N . 3.ij :hine ces lhall fee ' Though now I seem to you hnrunk up, retir'd

'lh chose-n .car-iors -sty n'ative sand, Vtithin the narrow comrafs of my woe.
Vho laai-r'Lj - n -.-ht a ndbeat ibe air iHae you nut sometimes fern an early flower
WYi;h :h-b ni:'d f-Saros. Open it's bud, and spread it's silken leaves,

r-'. Let r . Et'nr, nv

I orto. |j To catch f(eet airs, and odours to betlow
Lz-d '. r[. L:-' y R'andcih.J Abcut the time! Then, by the keen bast nipr, pull in it's leaves,

tha: :he cecirine fun i And, though fill living, die to scent and beauty1

Sh2ll his br2^a orbi: e'er yn hills fufprnd, Emblem of me; affi.icn, like a torm,
Ex?& :s to :et:-r . Th.s night once more Hath kill'd the forward blefrom of my heart.
'r ith:n :. efew2!l i rei m tent tc pich Erter Glenalvon.
Tc-orrow in the fine:. Propare thte fel. j Git.. 'Where is my dearet kinsman, noble Ran-
rF-E is his heart -wh *fr his co:ntry) .gha : doiph ?
i3 in :ie eve of ba.tzl nay rei n La;-' R. Have you not heard, Glenalvon, of the
Himielf to fcciai leafserc; f'v ete.r t;en, base-
WtE: d.gero a fColeers fo'i e.nears Gli.I havlc and that the villains may not 'scape,
Te ':-:an jc; that n-v:
e -r ty r-ion. With a firong band I have begire the wood.

LEr-.nr Racdosh .-Ed Nrvtl.; If they lurk there, alive they lhall be taken,

i. r'fR. hs ^rtingworci haefruIck astrteal h. And torture forcefrom them th' important frcree,
0':, D las Drcoulas' render was the ::n j Whether some fc of Andolph hir'd their swords,
't. re-sV :e ra,:c, ne'e r to mer t azin ! :Or if-
EHr g=r.v - rn :

Car n n ar.d Jdatr L , R. That care becomes a kinsman's love.

.ii H .a;-n

a -ra:.s 'c t :ho' ir:r n -sint h.n-s.

1 h- - a cunfl f;.r Glena!on's ear. [Ex:r Anna.

Ofrs;=: I rc ..-:--ncefs ' Then rmy bosom's ame I G.n. T''him your coufels always areccommands.
Cft, as tc!;n 5-;k bs\ :he :u:e tratrh cf ser a Ls.j R. i have not found so. Thou art known
R.:;urr'.d, cad --:. rdau:.::d ardo-r b:a.'d. to me.

-:.s:ar Ma :-.CcL H:av n -aru; ihse wce: baln;m GC.'. Known

cf r-ec: . Ldi ri. And mofl certain is my cause of knnw-

inr.: the sounds :nha: feferin your b:east! i G.e. WVhat do you kno ? By Hiearn, [ledge.
For e?.rthi; ccroint on crnnot cure ohem. Yocu mruch amaze me. No croat- thing,

Lz.r.r. One or. cure can Heav'n .tfeif betlow: Yorfeir except, du;:l thu s acc me. [merit

A e s.:-that bed in which the weary r:cf. ' Lrv R. s g.i;t so bold o and d-ft rhou make t
V;,e;i;hra:I am'! Alas, why am lu! Ofrth) pretended m eknefs T!'is to me,
A: t-,cr h-r: ?aretnt 1 retzee ! Who, vi;h a sgealcacfs ;vhic'h duty blames,

# ACT III.

Have hitherto conceal'd what, if d;vulg'd, And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than Wvhilll Lady Randolph seeps, i will walk forth,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too: [that, And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine. Sweet may her lumbers be! Ye miniflera

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind! Of gracious Heaven, who love the human race,

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man Angels and cfraphs, who delight in goodness !
Whom love transports beyond irie't virtue's bounds, Foi fake. your Ikies, and to her couch descend I
If he is brought by love to mircry, There from her fancy chafe those dismal forms
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlnrn, That haunt her waking; her lad fpiirt charm
Ulipitied cannot be. Pity's the alms With images celeltial, such as please
Which.on (uch beggars freely is beftow'd: The blecf above upon their golden beds.
For mortals know that hnve is flill their lord, Erter Servant.
And o'er their vain resolves advances still Ser. One of the vile afnallins is fecur'd.
A. fire, when kindled by our ihepherds, moves We found the villain lurking in the wood s '
Through the dry heath before tile tanning wind. With dreadful imprecatinns he drnies.

Lady R. Reserve these accents for fomeother ear. Al knowledge of the crime. But this is not

To I ovc's apology I liften not. His firftcffay: these jewels were conceal'd
M.rk thou my words; for it is meet thou shoulds. tIn the mr)l fecretplaces of his garment
His brave deliveres Randolph here retains: Belike the spoils of fume that he has murder'd.
Perhapshis presence may not please thee well! Anna. Let melookon them. Ha! here is aheart,
IBu, at thy peril, praiife aught against him, Th chosen crest of Douglas' v.lianlt name !
Let nor tiyjealoufy attemipt to lhake Thefeare no vulgarjewels. Guard the wretch.
And loof'n the good toot he has in Randolph; [Eit Anna.
Whose favourites 1 know thou halt fupplaiited. Enter Servants inbh a Prisoner.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'st pry Prif. I know no more than does the child unborn
Into my heart: 'sis open as my I'pech. Of what you charge me with.
I giv this early caution, and put on rft Ser. You fay so, Sir !
The cur,, before thy temper b eaks away. But torture soon ihall make you speak the truth.
The fr.endels franger my protetion claims: Behold, the lady of Lord Ranrdolph comes
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Eit. Prepare yourself to meet herjult revenge.

Glen. Chile that I was, to fart at my own hadow, Enter Lady Randolph and Anna.

And be tie /haliow fjol of coward colnfcience ! Arna. Summon your utmoll fortitude, before
am notwnat I have been; what Ihould be. You fpak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
The dartsof destiny have almof pierc'd Are now at fake. Think of the fatal secret,
My marble heart. Had I 'ne gain of faith Which in a moment from your lips may fly. [heart,
In holy legends, and religiou, ales, Lady R. Thou halt behold me, .ith a desperate
I should conclude there was an arm above Hear how my infant perilh'd. See, hekneels.
That fought againtl me, and malignant turn'd, [Tie Prisoner ricelr.
To catch myself, the .ubtle flare I set. Pri. Heav'n bless that countenance so fwect and
Why, rape and murder are not simple means mild
TIh' imperfect rape to Randolph gave a fpoufre A jdge lile thee makes innocence more hold.
And the ;iendeo munrder introduc'd Oh, save me, lady! from there cruel men,
A favourite to hide the fun from ne Who have attack'd and fciz'd me; who accuse
And wnrR of all, a rival. Burning hell ! Me of intended murder. As I hope
This were thy centre, if thought she lov'd him ! For mercy at thejudgment-feat of heaven,
'Tis certain she contemns me i lay, commands m eThe tehderlamb, that never nipt the grals,
And waves the flag If her difplafure o'er me, Is not more innocent than I of muroer. [produce?
In his behalf. And Ihall I thus be brav'd Lody' R. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye
Curb'.l, aslhe callsit, by dame chafiity! fIeSr. Wefoundhim lurkingin the hollow glynn.
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd be fled,
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge, We overtook him, and nquir'd from whence
Rife up, and fill my bosom with your fires And what he xwa : he said ie came tfr.m far,
And policy remorseless! Chance may spoil And was upon his journey m the comnp.
A tingle dim i but perseverance muRl Not satisfied with this, we fearch'd his clothes,
Prosper at ld. For chance and fate are words: And found these jewels, whose rich value plead
Peifillive wisdom is the fate of man. Mou powerfullyagainft him. Hard lie fems,
Darkly a projR& peers upon my mind, And old in villainy. Permit us to try
Like the red moon when rifsng in the ea3, His ftubbornefs againft::he torture's force.
Crofs'd and divided by lrange-colour'd clouds. Prf Oh, gentle ladyd4.h ysur lord's dear life,
I'll seek the slave who came with Norval hither, Which thee weak handi I Iwear, did e'er alil;
And for his cowardice was spurned from him. And by your children's welfare, spare my age
I've known such follower's rankled bosom breed Let not the iron tear my ancient j,,ins.
Venom most fatal to his heedless lord. I And my rey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady R. Account for rhefe tlinlr ln they can-

sI'.o».OO..w. ussOuC »..sosaaoo .i.
-- Forthefe, I fay ! be fledfllt to tle tru.l [not be:

D )ee ited falhood is moll cerain death.

A /C, '~
T ~[Anna rem.nl 1osts Ser'jI:rs, and returnr.

P, if. Alas ! I'm fore bret ! let nlecr :ital,
SCENE, a Court, &c. ats 6fre. For fake of lucre, fin againl his fir:l!

Eternal jllice is in this monl jilt !

Ener Anlna. I, guillefs now, mult former guilt reeal.
.,a. PrT H Y vaffa!s, grief, great nature's order LadS R. Oh! A.;na hear!--r. e mrar I charge

1 vlce 1PCAIL
A brc ak,

The'truth direct, for these to me foretel · That noe might mark the change of our efate, .
And certify a part of thy narration We left ihe country, traveli'd to the north,
With which if the remainder tallies not, Bought locs and herds, and gradualiy brought forth
An inflant.and a dreadful death abides thee. Our feeet wealth. But God's all-fecing eye

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speck to you asjufi Beheld ouravarice, and fmlote us fore.

As if you were the minister of I-eaven, For one by one all our own children died,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men. ' Ad he the firanger, sole remain'd the heir
Some eighteen years ago, I rented lanl, Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Of brave Sir Malcolo, then Balarmo's lord Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
BIut falling to decay, his ervants seiz'd Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
All that I had, and then turn'd itn and mine, With his own fccret: but my anxious wife,
(Four hclplefs infants and their weeping mother) Forboding evil, never would consent.
Out to the mercy of the winter winds. Mean while the flripling grew in years and beauty;
A little hovel by the river's fide And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore himelf,
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the Ikill Not as the offspring of our cottage blood
In filhing, which was formerly my sport, For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
Supported life. Whilfi thus we poorly liv'd,' But with the froward he was fierce as file,
One flormy night, as I iemember well, And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
The wind and rain- beat hard upon our roof: I set myfelfagaini his warlike bent;
Red came the river down, and loud and oft Butall in vain : for when a desperate band
The angry spirit of the:water Ihricl'd: Of robbers from the savage mountains came-
At the dead hour of night was heard thecry. Ladj, R. Eternal Providcncel Whatisthyname?
- Of one in jeopardy. I rote, and ran Prf. My name is Norval; and my name he bears.

To where the circling eddy of a pool, Lady R. 'Tis he! 'is he linmfelf! It is my son!
Beneath the ford,.us'd oft to bring within Oh, sovereign mercy ! 'twas my child I saw '
vly reach, whatever floating thing the liream No wonder, Anna, that my bosom burn'd.
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft; Aara. Jufi are your transports: ne'er was wo-
Butloolcing fad and earnel0 on the waters, man's heart
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round, Prov'd with such fierce extremes, high fated dame!
A bahket. soon I drew it to the bank, ' But yet remember that you are beheld
And neltled curious there an infant lay. By servile eyes i. your geflures may be seen

Lady R. Was he alive ' Impaflion'd, firange; perhaps your words o'erheard.
Pri. He was. Lady R. Well dolu thou counsel, Ann: Heav'n
Lady R. Inhuman that thou art! bellow

How couldfi thou kill what waves and tempelt On me that wisdom which my Rate requires.

FPrif. I am not so inhuman. [Ipared? Anna. The moments of de:iheration pass,
Lady R. Didsi thou not! ' And foon.you must resolve. This ufcful man

rnna Mynoble mitrefs, youaremov'd too much: Muff be difinifs'd with falety, ere my lord

This man has not the afp'ed.of fern murder' Shal wiith his brave deliverer return.
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear Prif. If I, amidst aflonilhment and fear,
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child. Have of your words and gellures rightly judg'd,

Prif. The needy man, who has known better Thou art the daughter of my ancient mafterj

One whom diflrefshas spited at the world, [days, The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon Lady R. With thee dillimulation now were vainl
To do such deeds as make the prosperous men I am, indeed, the daughter of Sir Malcom
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do'them, The child thou refcu'dll from the flood is mine.
And such a man was i a man declin'd, Prif. BleI be the hour that made me a poor man !
Who saw no end of black adversity: My.poverty hath fav'd my mafier's house I
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not Lady R. Thy words furprize me: lure thou dolf
Have touch'd that infant with a hand of harm. not feign !

-Lcdy R. Ha ! dolf thou fay so ; then perhaps he The tears Rand in thine eye: such love from thee
Prif. Not many days ago he was alive. [lives ! 'Sir Malcolm's house deserved not; if aright
Lady R. Oh! heavenly powers! Did he then Thou toldft the loryof thy owndil}refs.

die so lately?,' . Pri. Sir Malcom of our barons was the flower;

Prif. -I did not fay he died; I hope he lives. The tfcRt friend, the bet and kindest maler.

Not many days ago these eyes beheld : But, ah he knew not of my fad estate.
Him, fouoriling in youth;and health, and beauty. 'After the battle, where his gallant fun,

L.diy R. Where is henb'i:? iYourown brave brother, feli, the good old lord
Prij. Alas I know o .i.tihere. [dler, Cpeak Grew defcerate and reckless ofthe world;
Lady R. Oh, fate ' I fear thee fill; Thou rid- And never as he eri wvas wont, wentforth

Diree and clear; else I will search thy foul. To overlook the conduct of his cfrvants.
Area. l'ermit .me, ever honour'd !. Keen im- By them l was thrul out, and them I blame:

patience, May Heav'n so judge me as 1 judge my mailer

Though hard to be refirain'd, defeats itself.-' And God si love me as I love his race!
Pursue thy ltory with a faithful tongue, Lady R. His race lall yet reward thee. Op tbh
To the latt hour that thou didit keep the child. faith,

Pref. Fear not my faith, though I mult soea my Depends the fate of thy lov'd mailer's house,

Within the cradle where the infant lay, [Ihame. Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
Was flow'd a mighty (lore of gold andjewels; - That like a holy hermitage appears
Tempted by which, we did resolve to hide, Among the cliffs of Caronl ?
From all the world, this wonderful ,event, Prif. I remember
-And like a peasant breed the noble child. The cottage of the cliffs.

-Lay R. 'Tis that T mean :
There dwells a mai of venerable age,
Who in'my father's service spent his youth.:
Tell him l feht thee, and with him remain,
Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and noblea, what thou now
To me half told:. No more but this,, and thou
Shalt live in honourallthy future days;
Thy son fo'long ihall call thee father still,
And all the'lind hall bless the man whafav'd
The sori of Douglas and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well. my words if thou.fhould'ft meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy fTn, ARill call him so;
And mention nothing of his noblW father.

Prif. Fear not that mhall mar so fair an harvel

By putting in niy fickle ere 'tis.ripe.
Why'did leave my home'and ancientdame?
To find the youth, to-tell him all I knew,
An'd makel him wear these jewels in his arms,
Which mighr, 'lthought, be challeng'd, and so brin
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lady Randolph gbu towards tre Seroants

Lady R. This man is not th' aftaRin you fufpeaed

Though chance combin'd some likelihoods againl
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels [him
To their right owner, whom in hallte he seeks.
'Tis meet that you mhould put him on his way,
Since your milfaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeant Slranger and Servants

My faithful Ana ! doff thou fiare my joy
I know thou dost. Uliparallel'd event!
Reaching from heav'il to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father,
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For fach a gifrt! What does my Anna think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest?
How toon lie gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown
Aii'd'tower'd up to the region of his fre! [him

Anna. 'Hor fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

Myvftrious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftirnt, drew you to your own.

Lady R. The ready ftury of his birth bcliev'd,'

Slippreft my fancy quite nor did he owe
To'hy'lik'enefs my so sudden favour;
But nowfl long to fee his faceagain,
Examine'every feature, and find out
The lineaments of.Douglas, or my own.
But moRt of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell hinmail thefitory of his father.

Arina. With wary caution you must bear yourfclf

In public, leftyour tendernrfs break forth,
And in obfervcrs fir conjeaures'ftrange.
For, ifa cherub in the Ihape of woman
Should wilk'this'world, yet defamation would,
Like'a vile cur, baric at the angel's train.-'
To-day the baron flarted at your tears. .

Lady R. He did so, Anna ! wellthy miftref knows

If the leail circumlfance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, h:s fight would be
With jea.l;uy diforder'd. But the more
It dees behove me instant to decare .
Thb birth of Douglas, and assert his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to mneer,
Reveal the fccret and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he'doei now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature'" cjfc: hi smicn,- his fyeech,
Were sweetly timple, and full oft'decciv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.;
'But, when the imatter match'd his miglity mind,

G L A S. ?

Up rore ther hoer on his piercing eye
Sat observation; on each glance of thought
Derision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
I'urruie the flah. - - -

Anna. That demon haunts you fill:

Behbod Glenalvon.

'Lady R. Now I flun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of Norval:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret. '

rEnter Glenalvon.

Glen. Noble dame!

The hov'riog Dane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty holt,

ti That come to ettle where their valour conquerst

To win a country; or to loef themfelvs.
Lady R. But whence comes this intelligence,

Glenalvon ?

Glen.'A nimble courier sent from yondercamp,

g To'haften up the chieftains of the north,

Inform'd nie, as he pass'd, tht he fierce Dane

s. Had on the eaetcrn coaf ofLothian landed
,Near to tlat place where the fen-rock im:icnfre
i Amazing bass, looks o'er a fertile land. - ' [jin,

Lady R. Then must this weflern army march to

rhle'wailike troops that guard Edena's rto'irs. .

Glen. Byond all quellion. If impairing time

Has'not effic'd the'image of a place,

. Once perfect in my breafR, there is a.wild

WVhch lies to westward of that mighty rock,
And seem'! by niture formed for the camp
Of water-swafted armies, whafe chief firength
! Liesin firm-foot, un'ank'd with warlike'liorfe;

If martial Skill dihest the D- nihl lords,
There inaccessible their arm) lies
To our fwift-fcouring horse, the bloody field
Mull man to man, ad foot to foot, be fpughr.
Lady R. How.many mothers fiall b-wail their

sons !

How many wvidows werp their hulband's fain !
Ye dames of Denmark, e'en for you I feel,
Who, sadly siLting on the fea-Beat Shere,
Long look for lords that never shall return.

GC/. Oft has rh'unconqucr'd.Caleddonian sword

Widow'd the north. The childrth of the nain: '
Come,. as hope, to meet their fathers' fare.
The monter war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fruy, and liit-ending paii,.
Are objeas suited to Gicalvonn's foul.'
Scorn is more grievous than the pain's of death;
Reproar.h, more. picrcing than the pointed sword.

Lady R. I scorn thee not, but when 1 ought to

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted vii tae [scorn
Againlt audacious vice afihrts hcrfeif..
I own thy worth, Glenalvon; none m'cre apt
Than I to praise ihine.eminence'in arims,
And he the echo of thy martial fame..
No hlongerainly feed-a guilty poflion:
Go and pursue a lawful miftrefis Glory.,
Upon the Danish crefls redeem thy failt
And let thy valour be the ihield'of R'lnialph.

Glen.. One infiant'ray, ad. hear an alhel'd man.

When beauty pleads for vi tuc, vice abalh'd
Flies it's uwn colours, and gees o'er to virtue.
1 am your convert; rimc.will ibhw how truly;
Yet one.immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom our ardern zeal i-.day,
Somewhat too haughtily :defy'd your fnae,
Amidil the ihock of armies I'l defend,
And turn death from him, wvith a guasdian arm.
Sedate by us, -my bosom maddens not
At the timuiltuous uptoarof the field. [friend

Lady R. Aft thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy
B

# ACT IV.

But that's thy leatl reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is the truly ife;
And he who loves not others, lives unhletfi

[Exir Lady Randolph

CGen. [s/ro.1 Amen I and viiruis is is own re-

I thisnk that I have hi the very tone [ward !-
Jn which Ihe loves to (peak. Honey'd af'ent,
How pleaflng art thou to the talic of nan,
And woman also! flatrerv dire&
Rarely difghfts. The) little know mankind
Who doubt it's operation: 'tis my key,
Ald opcs the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have fuccedcdd nons I know not;
Yet I inclinc'to think her itormy virtue
Is lull'd awhile: 'tls her alone 1 fear:
Whild- fle and Randolph li.e, and live in faith
And amity, uncerta;n is my tenure.
Site o'er my head fbfpends disgrace and death,
By that wveak air, a peetvil female's';ll.
I am not id!e ;I tb the 6hbs and hlaws
Of fortun?'s tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of Ncrval's I have found moa apt:
1 liewv'd him gold, and he has piwn',i his loul
To. fay and swear whatever I suggest.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Tswixt man and woman, which I have o'.ferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantafic dam's,
Who are, like Lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In railing Randnlph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom err',
Who thinks thd worlt h-'can us wbonankind.

r 4rnr
a soo ssc xor poc is

AcT IV.

Flsorij' af'TrUe:pets.

Enter Lord Randolph atitnet'
Lord R. UMMON an huondred horre,b by break

-' I 'of day, -. . .
To wait our pleaftire at the catle gate.

Enter Lady Randolph.

Lady R. Alis, my Lord I I've heard unwelcome

The Danes are landed. i" [lnevs

Lord R. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament efTay,-
Of some young knight refolh'd to break a spear,
And Rain with holile blood his maiden arms.
The Dancs are landed: we must beat them back,
Or live the saves of Denmark. .

Lady R. Drea'dftl times' i
Lord R. The fencelcfs villages are all forsaken:

The.tcembling mothersS and their childrn 'lodg'd
In well-girt towers and caltlesi v/ilR the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return. hol !

Lady R. Immrnfe, as fame reports, the Danilh
Lord R. Were it as numerous as loud fane rc-
.. ports,

An army knit like ours would pierce it through:
Brothess, that bhrink not from each othe-' fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files;
For his dear cfspring, and the wife he loves,
The hulband, and the scarless father arm.
In vulgar.brefls heroic ardour burns,
And the poor peasant m.stes his dring lord.
Lay R. Mlen's minds are temypr'e, like thlir

fivords, for .arr;

Livers of danger, on defrua;on's br;ni
TWn; jay to rear erct their daring forms.

G L A S.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone w;dow's life;
.nd the fad mother's grief-erbitter'd age.
Vhercis our gallant suel ?
Lord R. Down in the vale

I lett him. managing a fic.-y tlcd,
iVhufe ftubbr:.els had fo'l'd the ftregth and JI.1)
O every rider. Butbehod h ecomes;'
in carnelt colverlation with G.cr.nal-n.

Enttr Norval and :lrnalvol.

Glena!von! with the lark arise, " 'fotht
And lead my troops that lie in ynder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
Niorv,., Ihou g, eJl Vith Ime. But si,, young man!
Where didft thou learnfo to direouile of war,
And in such serms, as I o'crhrard tonday ?
War is noviilagc fRiicoce) norit's phrale
A language taught amnng the flhpherd ivains.

Nr. Small is the skill mny lord rdcliht tio p;aifo

In him he favours. FIcar from whenlce it cmie.
Beneath a m:lutrain's brw, the mot remote
Aind inaccrlfible by shepherds trod,
1i a deep crve, duog by no mortal hand,
A hermit 'li'd; a melncholy man,
Who tv-s the wonder of our wad'rmng f\'inr;
Auftcre and lonely, cruel to hi.nfelf,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
W ltcr his drink, his food the Ihepherds alms.
I wenttofee hiin, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entering on difrou,-l', luch stories told
As made ms oft revisit his ad cell.
For he had been a foidier in his youth
And fought in famous bartler, when the peers
Of Europe, by tl'e bold Godtredo led,
Against th' uharping infi el difplay'd
The hleled crouf, and wun the Holy Land.
Pleas:l8 witb my idmratrion, and the fire
His speech idruck from me. thc old man syould flke
H1 years avway, and ad hi, young encoulters:
rtlen, havilg hbew'd his iounds, he'd lithim down,
And all the live-long day dilcouife of wsar.
ro hclp my rancy, itl the fil>nioh giecn turf
He cut .hefigores of the marlbal'o hofi j
Delcrib'd rhe motions, and explain'd the use
Of tlbe'rep'column, and the lengthen'd line,
I'he Iquare, thecrcfccnt, and the phalanx firmi
Fur all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast at, ias to this hermit knowvil.

Lard R. Why did this follierin a defirt hide
ThbCe qtaHtics, that hnoild have grac'd a camp ?

s'or. Thst too at laftl Iearn'd. Unhappy man!

Returning homewa'r by Mcflina'r por',
Loaded with wealth and hnllours lbrevly wvon
A rude and bui'lrous c pltan of tle fe.
Faften'd a qilarrel on him. Fierce they fought}
The firangrr fell, and vith hi, dying brccth
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty puv'r
The soldier cried. my blotiser ! 0:;, my brother!

Lady R. His broth-rf
Nor. Yes i of the fame pa'enrs born;

His only bro'hr. They ec!,ang'd forgivenef:
And hapy, in ny tnind, was he that diedj
For many dearhs has the ful ivnr fuser'd.
In the wild d-fart on a ruck he fits,
Or on fonue namelers stream's untrodden banks,
And rumiNares all day his dreadful fae.
At times, alas ! rPt in hi. p-rfe& mnind,
iinlds dialogues witlh his lov'd biother's ehonl;
And oft each night foi fakes his fillen couch,
Tn makr fad nrifons for hi:nl he flew. [born

· La R. To what mvyltrious woes are mortals

In ri3 oire traged werei there no more
Unhappy perfoans ? Did the parcnts livc?

Aor,. TaO, they wtre dead; kind Haven clos'd V ir. And ;n yonder camp

theirh e)es, La, R. Alas

Before tlheir frn had Ihed his brotheJ's blood. ANir. Ytu make mr tremh!e -Sighs and tears

Lard R. HIrd i5 his fate; for he was not io Lives my hi've father?

Therc is a drfriny in this strange world; [blame! Loa' R. Ah, too brave indeed I
W\hich oft decrees an undcrervcd doom. He fell in battle ere tlyfelf was born.
Let fihoolmsn tell us why-Fiom whence there NAor, Ah, me unhappy! Ere I saw the light 1

founds? ['ruprr er a dar.re. But does my mother live ? i may conclude,

inter an Onficr. From my.onn fate, her portion has been furrow. J

Of. My tord, the trumpets of the troopsof Lorn: Lay R. She lives i but v.afles her life in conrr

Their vaiiant leader hdls thel noble Ran olph. l.rnt woe;
Lord R. Mine ancient guelt Does he h war- W eeping her hilband lla;n, her inf4nt loft.

riors lcad? Alro. You that are lill'd so wrell in the fad story

Has Drpmailk rous'a the brare old knight to arms i Of my uhappy parents, and with tears

Of. lo; worn 0with warfare; he resigns. lhefword, .Iewail their destiny, now have compallion

His eldest hops, the valiant John of Lorh, Upon the ofispring of the friends you lov'd.
Now lends tis kindred bands. Oh, tell ime who and where my mother is!

Lesrd R. Glenalvon, go. Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps Ihe bends

W;th horpitality's mot Itiong re'quest . IBeneath the weight of other ills than grieft
Entreat the chief. [Erit Oleniilvon. And ,

ol, implores oi Heaven the aid

Of. My Lord, requcfis are vain. Her ton ihould give. It is, it mufl be so-

He urges on, impatient of delay, I'our countenance confcfles that the's wretched;
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach: Oh, tell me her condition ! Can the sword-

tLrd R. iay vicfory fiton the warrior's plume! Who hall refill me in a parent's caufee? [fron

Bravet of men! his flocks and herds are fafej Lady R. Thy virtue ends her woe-Miy son ! my
Remote from war's alarms his palures lie, ror. Art thou my mother ?
lmontannacceb ecur'd: La R. I a

monta iacther, and the wife of

Yet foremost he into the plain descends, Douglas ! [Faiiis up n bis nec'.
Eager to bleed in battles not his own. Nor. Oh, heav'n and earth ! how wond'rous ia
Such were the heroes of the ancient world; Ever let me kneel! [my fatee
Contemners they of indolence and gain; Lady R. Image of Douglas ! fruit of fatal love !
But flil, for love of glory and of arms, All that 1 owe thyfire I pay to thee.
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift; or. Refprct and admiration tlail possess me,
Against each strong antagonist the spear. Checking the love and fondness of a son:
I'll go and press the hero to my brcaft. Yet I was filial to my humble pirents.

[Exis -witb lie Officer. But did my fire surpass the re sos men,

Laldy R. The soldier's lo(tinefs, the pride and As thou eccellcft all of womankind ?

Invesling awful war, Norval, I fee, [porp Ladly R. Arise, my son. In me thou doltbthole.
Transport thy youthful mind. The poor remains of beauty once admir'd.

Noi: Ah! Ihould they not ? The autumn of my days is come already -

Blefs'd be the hour I left my father's hoife ! For sorrow made my summer hade away.
I might have been a fhpherd all my days, Yetin my prime I equall'd notthy father:
And tole obscurely to a pcafanL's grave. His eyes were like the eagle's, yet fometimnei
Now,. if I live, with mighty chiefs I itand; Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he wvon
And, if I fall, with noble dust 1 lie. All hearts with fo'tnefs, or with fpiric aw'd.

Lady R. Thereis a generous fpiritin thy breat, INr. How id he fall? Sure 'tws a bloody field

That could have well fuflain'd a prouder fortune. When Dduglas died. Oh, 1 have much to alk!
Some lucky chance has left us here alole. Lay R.

a 'lereafter thou (halt hear the lengthen'd

Unseen, unheard, by human e)e or ear, Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes. [tale
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale. At prercnt this-Thou art the rightful heir

dNor. Let there be danger, Lidy, with the fecrtt, Of yonder catle, and the wide domains

That I may hug it to my grateful heart, Which now Lord Randolph, as my hulbandj hold,,
And prove my faith. Command my word, rriy life: But thou shalt not be wrong'd ; I have the power
These are the sole polfefions of Foor Norval. To right thee riil. Before the king I'll kneel,

Lady R. Know'T1 thou these gems ? Al:d call Lord Douglas to protet his blood.
aor. Durf believe mie n eyes, Nar. The blojd of Douglas will protef itSelf.

I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's. Lay R. But we lhall need both friends and fa-
Ladyr R. Thy father's fay'lt thou ? Ah, they vour, boy,

were thy father's ! To wrft thy lands and lordhlip from the gripe

Nor. I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd OfRandolpil and his kinsman. Yet I think

Of buth my parents, whence fJch splendour came? M .ty tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
But I was check'd, and more could never learn. My lie incline the virtuous to beieve.

Ladiy R. Then learn of me, thou art not Norval's Vcrt. To be the son of Douglas is to me
AVrr. Not Norval's son! [foa. lInheritance enough. Declare my birth,
Lady R. Nor of a sepherd fpruhg. And in the field I'll Peck for fame and fortune.
.Aor. Lady, who am , thenz Lady R. Thou dol not know what perils ond in-
Lady R. Noble thou art; Avait thie poor man's salour. Oh, my son! [juftic

Pot nable was thy file. The nobile blood in all the land'l aasl'd,

INor.' I will believe-.- Having no lacquey but pale poverty.

Oh, tell me farther ! Say, who was my father? Too long halt thou been thus attended, Douglas,

Lady R. Duglas! Tlo long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
aNor. Lord Douglas, -whom to-day I fia ? 1The anton heir of some inglolious chief
daSy IR, Hi ,aunantbi-Sohcr, i Pr;haps has fcora'd thec in the oulhful frorts,

Bx

XWh;il thy ind;gant fpi;et fweil'M ir. vain. In thle clc thicket take y6ur seeret dand ,
Such contumely thou now no more halt bear: :Thc'moon hilnds bright, and your.own eyes msay
Rut' how I pitpofe to ledrcfs thy wrongs Of tneir behav;our. [judge
Mua be hereaftertold. Prudence dirds Lord . Thou dol counl wel wl.
That we 'lhoul: part before yon chiefs return. Gle/. Permit me now .to make one night eflay.
Retire, and: rom thy ruftc follower's hand Of all the trophies which vain mortals buaft,
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care, By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
Anxious to fee thee, ditated before The first and fairest in a young man's cyct.
This casual opportunity arose Is woman's captive heart. Sucefiful love
Of privateconference. It's purport marki,. With glorious furncs intoxicates the nmind,
Flor, as I there appoint, we meet again. And the proud conqueror in triumph moves,
Leave me, my son, and frame thy manners fill Air-Borne, exalted above vulgar ncn. .
To Norval's, not to noble Douglas' slate. Lord R. And what avails this maxim?

Nor. I will remember. Where is Norval nowv Gln. Much, my lord .

That good old man. Withdraw a little; I'll accoel young Norval,

Lady R. At hand conceal'd he lies, And with ironical derisive counsel

An uleful witness. But beware, my son, Explore his fpiiir. If he is no more
Of yon Glenalvon; in his guilty breast Than humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Reften a villain's firewdnes, ever prone B: ave as he is he'll hrink aftonilh'd from me
To filfe conjeaure. He hath griev'd my heart. Buc if he be the favoutite of the fair,
VNor. Has he indeed ? Then let yon false Glenal- Lov'd by the filft of Caledonia's dames,

vbn He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns

-wa.re of me. t[xit. Upon the hunter's fpea.
Lady R. There burst the fmother'd lame. LrR. LordR is lrewdly thought. [my lord

Oh, thou aJi.righteous and eternal King! Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let-
Who Father of the fahaerlefs art call'd, His rising wrath restrain. [Exit Randolph.
Proteet my son! Thy inspiration, Lord, ' Iis strange, by Hcav'n
Hath fill d his bosom with that sacred fire; That she ihould run full tilt her fond career
Which in the braflts of his forefathers burn'd: To one so little known. She too that fcem'd
Set him on-high, like them, that he may Ihine Pure as the winter llream, when ice, imbofs'd,
The star and glory of his native land i Whitens it's course. Even I did think her chale,.
Then let the minifterof death descend, Whose charity exceeds not. Precious fexl
And bear my willing spirit to it's place. Whole deeds lascivious pats Glenalvon's thoughts!
Yonder they come. How do bad women find Enter Norval.
Ulnchanging afpcts to conceal their guilt, His port i love; he'sin a proper mood
When 1 by reafon.and byjuftice urg'd, To chide the thunder, if at him it roar d. [A/ifd
Full hardly can diffcmble with thefc men Has Norval seen the troops
In nature's pious cause? N'or. The setting fun

Ecter Lord Randolph and Glenalvon. With yellow radlance lighten'd all the vale

Lord R: Yon gallant chief, And as the warriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm,

Of arms enamour'd, all repose difclalms. Cor!et, or spear, glnc'd back his g;,ded beams.

Lady R. Be not, nmy lord, by his example fway'd. The hill they climb'd, and halting at it's top,

Arrange the business of to-morrow now, Of more than mortal size, tow'ring. they feem'd
And *hen you enter speak of war no more. [Exit. An host angelic, clad in burning arms.
Lord R. 'Tis so, by Heav'n! her mien, her voice, Glen. Thou talk'lt it well; no leader of our hol

her eye, IP founds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

And her impatience to-be gone, confirm it. Nor. If I shall e'er acquire a leader's name,
Gl.e He parted from her now. Behind the Myfpeech willbelefsardent. Novelty

mount, Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiratioS

Amongit the trees, I saw him glide along. Vents itfelffreely; finee no part is mine

Lord R. For fad frqurftir'd virtue Ihe's renown'd. Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.
Glen: Molt true, my lord. Glen. You wrong yourfclf, brave Siri your marc
LirdR. Yet this diftinguilh'd dame tial deeds

Invites ayouth, the acquaintance of a day, Have rank'd you with the great, Bat marl; me?
Alone to mnet her at the midnight hour. Norvali
This aflignation, [Shes a letter.] the aflaffin Lord Randolph'a favournow exalts your youth
Her manifest affe&ion for the youth, [frecd, Above his veterans of famous service.
Might breed suspicion in a hnfband's brain, Let me, who know there soldiers, counsel you.
Whoue bentle consort aUl for.love had wedded: Give them all honour: seem not to command
Much more in mine. Matilda never lov'd me. Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Let no man, after me, a woman wed, Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.
Whose heart he knows he has not, though she lc or. Sir, I have been accufom'd all my days
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry. [brings To heat and speak the plain and simple truth:
For let her seem, like the night's fiadoyy queen. Ald tho' 1 have bern told that there are men
Cold and contemplative-he cannot trust her; Who borrow friendlhip's tongue to (peaktheir scorn
She may, she will, bring lfame and sorrow on him; Yet in such language 1 am little fcili'd.
The worst of sorrow, and the worst of thames ! Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,

Gltn. Yield not, my lord, to such affliicing iAlthough it founded hardily. Why remind

But let the spirit of an husband nccp, [thoughts 3 Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power'
Till your own senses make a sure conclulion. With luch contemptuous terms?
This billet must to blooming Norval go: Gler. I did nor mean
At the next turn awaits my trufly spy; To a;il your pride, wicih now I fee is great,
I'll iivg it him refitted for his mailter, A i; 'hl pride i

# ACT V.

Your pride'a exce five. Yct, for Randolph's fake,
A will not leave you to it's raf] direclion.
If thus you fwvel, and frown ar high-bon men,
Think you, will they endure a rhepherd's scorn ?

Ar-r. A lepherd's feorn !
Glen. Yea: if you presume

To bend on soldiers these difdainfill eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in fecrtr, you're no match for me
What will become of you ?

N. r, If this were told !- [Aiide.

Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous feist

Glen. Ha ! dofl thou threaten me i
Nir. Didif thou not hear ?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe

Had not been queflion'd thus. lBt such as thee-

Nor. Whom doll thou think me?
Glen. Norval.
Nor. So I am-

And who is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes ?

Glen. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy

At best no more, even if he fpcaks the truth.

Nsr. False as thou art, dofl thou fufpe& my truth
Glen.Thy truth ! thou'rt alla lye ; and falfc as hell

Is the Yain-glorious tale thou told'ft to Randolph.

Nor. If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bed-rid old,

Perhaps I should revile; but as I am,
I have no tongue to rail. The humble Norval
Is of a race who firive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy lhallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

Glen. Didft thou not know Glenalvon, born to

Ten thoofand slaves like thee- [command

Nor. Villain, no more !

Draw, anu defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another caufc:
But Heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

Enier Lord Randolph.

Lorl R. Hold, I command you bota. The man

Makes me his foe. [that stir!

Nor. Another voice than thine

That threat had vainly founded, noble Randolph
Glre. Hear him, my Lord i he's wond'rous con.

dcfcending

Mark the humility of Ihepherd Ncrval!
Nor. Now you may soss in safety.

[nSbetlbs bisl fwrd

Lord R. Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; out unfold to me
The cause ofquarrel, then Ijudge betwixt you.

Nor. Nay,my good Lord, tho' Ieicre you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blulh to speak I v-ill not, cannot fp:ak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a subje&'s homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd reject.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your faoours, and let Norval go
Hence as became alone, but not dilonour'd.

Lird R. Thus far I'1l mediate with impartia

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land [voice
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted ficids:
Suspend your purpose till your countri's arms
Repel the bold invader: then dCcidj
The private quarrel.
Glen, I agrtc 9o ihii.

13
NVr. And I,

Enrer Ser'vant,

Serv. The banquet waits.
L rd R. e .

We comeirb Ser-ant.

Glrn. Norval,

Let no: our variance mar the foclal hour,
'Jor wrong the hofp;rality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet v rinkled hate,
Shall Ilain my counteniisce. Sooth thou thy brosw;
Nor let our firife dinturb the gentle dame.
NI r. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my rcflnt?

ment.

When we contend again, our firife is mortal.
4oouo TOO u O °aawnenone wrw orown w ormonan.a i4

ACT V.
S C E N E, tre ;,.d.

Enter Douglas.

Doug.T HIS is the place, the centre of the

i 11 grove;
Here flands the oak, the monarch of the wood.
How sweet and fulemn is the midnight scene I
I'he lilver moon, unclouded, holds her way
rhro' liies where I could count each little flar.
T'he fan-ing weft wind fcrccely tfirs the leavesc
The river, rnihing o'er it's pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a flilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can he in aught believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old Norval.

O'd Nor. 'Tis he. But what if he should chide
Hisjult reproach I fear. [me hence !

[Douglas turns aside, andj ee bir,

Forgive, forgive,
Canst thou forgive the man, the felfilh man,
Vho bred Sir Malcolm's heir a IhephCed's son
Dsug. Kneel not to me; thou art my s.ither fRll;
rhy wifrh'd-fol presence now compleats my'joy.
Welcome to me; my fortunes thou fialt flare,
And ever honour'd with thy Douglas live. [son!

Old 1or. And dofl thou call me f.rther ? Oh, my

I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. "'Tsas my crianc
Which in the swidernefs so long conceal'd
The blolfmn of thy youth.

Ds.p. Not wmife the fruit,

That in the wilderncfs the blolfom blow'd.
Amangil the ,hcpherds, in the humble cotr
I learn'd soule leftlns, which I'll not forget
When I iiihabit yonder lofty towers.
, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The pror man's fricnd i and when my vassals bonw
Norval harl fmoorn thu crelted pride of Douglas.

N-r. Let me but livn to fee thine exaltation I

Yet grievous are my tars. Oh, leave this place.
And those unfriendly towers!

Dcug. Why lhould I leave them ?
Old Nrr.. Lrd Randolph and his kinsman seek
DsU,. 'Hlow knov.'ft tho ththat ? [your life.
Oid is:r. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
I Aidd fondly trod in each accullom'd path
: That to the caflle leads. Whilil thus I rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpected founds
Of earnest voices. On the persons came.
Unseen I lurk'd, and heard them name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,
And that Glncalvon Still of you they spoke,
DOtJGLA ,

And of the lady; threat'n.ng was their spec, Tas rang, they aid, a wonderful difcov'ry
T'ho' bot imperfeCaiy my ear co.id nar it. And ever and ano they vov'd reverBe.
"Twas ftrlilg-, they said, a w.)ndtrful ci'cov';y; i LJ R. Defend us, grac;ios Cod we are beray'd:
Ald ever and anon they vuw'r revenge. IThey I;ave found out the seret of thy birth:

Daua, Rcvil:ig fur what ? It mull be io, 'Flt

b is the grea- discovery.

o/ld J^ . So: being whlt a-u are, S:r ;M, colm's hr;r ia come to claim ris oWn,

5;r tMaiclm',s iir how cle have ou orffrcned A nal they w ii! e crcvcn'd. Perhaps eveni nowY
WVhen they were gonle I hied ir to rny co;tiaS, A-r'd and prrpar'd t-r murder, they but wait
4Aid there fat muling how I ble nii,:rl li.i.il d -irir alld mnore filen: hour t o break
Mieal:s to iiform you of theiL w;k. ed ilur:ll; Ilrt. the chamber where they tnoirk thu Ileep'ft.
But 1 could think of none. At iaf perpilx d, rifl moment, this, Heav'n hAth otdain'd to save
I ifnied forth, ciircmpaffrng trie tiwer !Fly to the camp, my ion ! thee!
With many a weary Itcp and ilfh!ul look. Dcul. And leave you here?
Now PrJvidence bar brought you to nmy fight,, No: to the cafile let us go together,
Let not your too coraiageods fplrrie frern Cail up the ancient servants of your house,
The caution wliich I givs. w ho in their youth did tat your father's brcad,

Doug. I scorn it not. 'hen tell them loudli that I am vour Ion.

Mly mother wain'd me of Glenalvon'c baenefr : If in the brea.is of lmen on: spark remains
But I will nor fulpcri the noble Randolph. Of ficred love, fimeliry, cr pity,
lil our encounter *itli the v Ie afillins, S' me in ylur caLft will arm. I alle but few
I mark'd his brave denieanour: hiin I'll truL. ITo drive thole spoilers froni my father's house.

Otd. i-ar. 1 fear )ou will, too far. Lady R. Oh, nature, nature ! what can check
Doug. Here in this vlacc thy force?

I wait my moither's coining: the (hall knowr Thou genuine sfifpring of the daring Douglas i
Wlhat thou ilai told her counfcl I will tollow. But ruh nulu on dritrutcion: save thvlclf,
And cauious ever are a mother's counlels. And i am alfc. To nim they mean no harm,
'ou mult nej art: your lenc may prevent 'ihy tltay ut ri s tily precious iire in vain,

Oa~r ;~inc~rrr~ iew. T'hat windii;g path conduetr thee to the river.

O/JU A ,. My blelfing rel1 upon thee Crois where thou ele t a broad and beaten way,
Oh i may lHeaven's hand, which tLv'd thee from Which running caRtward :eas thee to the canp.

tIt scare, uInlant demind admittance to Lord Douglas;

And from the lIord of fits, be nearlhee Iill; Shew him rhefejewels, which his brother wore.
Turning miichance, if aught hangs o'cr thy head, Thy look, thy voice, tlii makel him feel the truth,
All upon mine ! [Exir. Which I by certain proof will loan confirm.

DDcrg. He loes me like a parent Dcug. I yield me, and obey: but yet my heart

And mu.1 not, naill not, loie the fun he loves, Bleeds at this parting. Something bids m: flay
Altho' his fTon has found a nobler fatter. And guard a mother's life. Oft have I riad
Eentful day ! how hall thou chang'd muy fate ! Of wund'rous deeds by onle bold arm atchiev'd.
Once onl the cold, and wintcr-fhaded fide Our foes are two; no more: let me go forh,
Of a bleak hill mif:hance had rooted me, And.see if any fhleld cn guard G!enalson.
Never to thrive, child of anotier full; Lady R. if thou regard'll thy moter, or rever't
Tranfplanoed now to the gay funny vale, Thy father's memory, think of this no more.
Like the green tnorn of Mlay my fortune flowers. One thing I have to fay before we part:
Ye glorious clars ! high heaven's rcfplcndcnt host, Long wert thou lo0; and thou art found, my child,
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd, In a molt fearful season, War and battle
Hear and rccord my foul's unalter'o with ! have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Dead or alivee let me but be renown'd Which way thecurrent of thy temper fcts:
May Heav'n ihfpire Lome fielce gigantic Dane, 'u-day l've found thee. Oh! ny long loll hope
To give a bold defiance to our holt I If thou to giddy valour giv't the reign,
Before he speaks it out 1 will accept; Tir-morrow I may lose my lon forever.
Like Douglas conquer, or like Doug'as die. The love ot thee before thou f'aw'l the light,

Erter Lady Randolph. Sullain'd my life when thy brave father fell.

Lsiry R. hy son I I heard a vuice- If thuu fha:r fall I ha\e nor love nor hope
Drag. The voice was mine. rear, In this war e w.Ildi! Mly suo, remember mre!
Lady R. Didit thou compldin aloud to nature's Dst.g What Ihall I fay? How can I give you

That thus in dulfy Ihades, at midnight hours, Tne god of battles of my life dispose [corr.fort
By health the mother and the fun ihoulJ meet ? As rmy bn best for you 1 for whole dear fake

[E.rbarin.g bin:.I \iil not bear mfelf as I refolv'd.
D1ug. No; on this happy day, this better birth- But yet conlider, a- no vulgar name

day, That which I boart foudil amongt martial mes

My thoughts and words are all of hope and jay. Hosw will ingloriocu caution suit my claim ?

Lady R. Sad fear and melancholy ili divide The polt of site unhbrin-ing I maintain.

The empire of my breall with hope and joy. My country's foes muit witncrs who I am.
Now hear what 1 advile ---On thre inv.der's heads I'll prove my birth,

D.ig. Fir0, let me tell I'ii friend, and fe- confess the genuine tlrain.

What llav the teaour of your counsel change. If in tLis trife I fall, blanme not your son,

Lady R. My heart forebodes lome evil. Vho it he livcs not honoar'd, muso notl hie.
Dsg. 'Tis nor gaod- LaL;iy R. I wil not ur:er whart mi bosom feei.

A: eve, unseen by Randolph and Glena;von, Too .trll I love that valour which I :arrn;
The good old Norva: in the grove o'erheard Faresel, my Ion ! m) counicil are but vain.
Their converfition: oft they mention'd me [E'r raerg.
With dreadful hr(ea'nipg )oQU .:y fogetirmes And, a. high i ca'n han wiii'i i: all mult he.

nam'd. [rpilarot,

Caze not on me, thou wilt miltatr thie paIh!; as I thil anfC ? No; I was not the cause.
I'll point it cut lgain. [fJai as thfe are fr-artcing, YVn mrtchisris vialin did lcduce my foul
Eri.r fr:n the lt;id, Lord Randolph ard Glenal- r" fr'"t:cj.-ril,!'.

von. ;.4n
...!e lady live:

T' agrony , geirf hath but fuDprefs'd

Lord R. Not in her plefence. A ,;;ie !,ir pavers.

Now--- I.cd IR. nut mlv deliverrr's de.d

Girn. I'm prpr'd ' ire ori did n! ae cl rt': Lltd Rai,!.lpl well,
Lcrd IR. Nn: i command thre lay. S lcece of hear:, for fpo'tl, hlnnrur rt,ri'd

Io gooaOe it never f., l he fid And, in m) c.arl) uJys, glen gain'd
That I took nods to combat mortal man. Benearh the holy ban-er f t chr ol.
The nnblell ve.g-ance th ml cnplat. '

> pa
the rnoono of ife, shame comes upon me-

[CG'nalvon rer..e fisr. /,cP e

s6

tbrc Ji:efm / Reproach, ai-d Inra m, and ualic hare,

tbe foge. ,a:ers .a'ijpealis. .a-,e ar at haind: f;r all mo n:in. will think -

Gsle. Demnr.s ol deat, cumre (Itle on my fwrerd, That Randr,, ih baf-y llaL''d Sir M.alcolm's hrer.

Ane to a doubile augltter guide it home! Lda . [r:p cio.] Whee am I -ae? S.il
Thi- lovr and the h .1b-r.ld oth nmutl die. r[ra ' I i ;is wrc he world
aw

in thiswte:ch d iworld

J.:rd R. [Bcli: ti, jsaces.] Draw, vi-lain ! Griefcanon break a heart so hard as mi,-.
D:.^. [;I.'rtoc.i] Af;ll m-e not, Lord Ran'iolph |lyrotl r; sr vr in analilh: tl a roe .thfrrrt

No;t as thour ioV l thI lel. [ClCajhio. rfj. rd,.. With ho;e's a:ritance, hare the brurt oll ircv

CGen. [oni-cra.- .J No ir ;5 thle rime. | And train'd me on to b- the objetl o1r,

Er.tr Laa.y Ra.idoirpn, m' S'' I

:r:, j S r .
tLar -On wMhch O -nno:enc- R;sIla. iifolf,

. Sete. Jo. a-:;c.t ornei ber'ljtl. i'M ,-hi;g . i rea I.-cle, a tale or me,

La .t aR. Lcrd -Rjnaolph, hear me; all na:l ble T17o a-c t's vall., r.a..

2,t spare I oh, fplrc ,
m ii I [th;.n-owl. L:-i . On, mlfeiy!

Enter Douigas, iti.:t ad S:eCrd i: ti ]larrl. d Ami.(t tliy ra'in grier 1 mull procl;enr
D;ag. hi' onulher's icte! My lSnnocnco.

I car proe the e

ls still. La R . Th innocen:e!

Li y R. Hie iives, he liver; Jord R. My gouil

For this, f'r tris :o Heaven eternal ra f:e ! Is .,n:-rence, romp-r'd w th what thnli think'il it.
Be; sure I fiw thee fall. LLad v R. Of thiec I llnk nt: what have I to do

D u It wras C!enalvon. *VWi:t, thee. or any tching ? Mlv son r

m 1-i'

Ju.t m'. arm had malrer'd Randolph's fwordp ': b'a3'viful ! my nrvr' i .-,l p-rld wv- , I
Th' viliain carme behind me ; but I frew him. Of tee. and of thy via:l - mn l, nd hea:t
L-d j R. B-hind thee! A: ! thou'rt woune ed O'erliow'd this da! waitl ;:lrnfpi:t, iwhen I thoubt

Oh, my child. Of growine old tri iJlt ? ncr If thine,

ionv pale thou lookl-' ! And fill; I lose tlheonowi WhV, milht make Ip to me their fr-her's chl:!hool,

D-:rg. Do not despair; I ftr a little faintnei'- i And bear my brother's and my hufl Ind's na:Gc:
h eir i.'vilinat lat. [Idars rup;a n bijvord. Now al! my hprs are dead' A little lhile
Lt..; R. There is no hop !i Wais I a niiec ! a ,not'hr not so long '

Ana; roe cmil par: ! The hand of death i on thee! Vlha. n i now ;-- lioo.v. Brt 1 (Ihi be
O amy belovra cT.ii.1 ! 0 D elas, D..u :. T';.ani a. whl;ll 1 p!rai- fr such a frn

[Du .glae ger.t;.og rn rred mto.-rfsie. And.fuch a ar hnd drive n to ms as-. R[Ps.: aur.

Doug. Too sooen we pr I h ve not lorg hen, L.rdR. Fo!lovher, Lnao-: lmrI .lfwo!.lh f.ilo.e

O de.inyl hardly thou deal'l! with! me: [Douglas. lut in ti.srage fle mu/l abhor my prese cc.
Clou :ed and hid. a rlranger 1t. n.£s ls, LEni' Ann2.
Jn low and poor obfiurity I'e liv'd. [:ike this? Er!e. O:d \orval.

LadyR. His He v'n prefeiv'd thee fr an end O.dAkr. I hberd the voice ofwoe: Heaven gs Ird
D)asg. Oh. had I fallen as my brave faithrs fell my child !

Tura.inr with fatal arn the ride of battle ! Lrd R. Alrea iy is the id:eg.ping crow.d,
Like them I Ihou.l have fmn '*i and oelcom'd death. The f;ircuf vulgar, came to gaze on Rar.d l:h.
But thus to perish by a viilain', hand I rc gone.
Cut off ianni nlatre's and froim l.ory's course, O' ar. I fear thee not. I will not e.
Wh;ch nev-r mortal was ( fond to run-- HCe I'l remain. I'm an accomplice, lrd,
Lady R. IHer judice; hear! arc ee sthe e sr it Wi' 1 thee in murd-r. Yes, my fi.r: di he'p

ot v;rtue t [Douglas f./;. | To cruAl d w:n to the ground this love!) plLiir.

Dsa- . Unknown I die; no tongul tihai fpea: of[ Oh, noble'n )outh that ever vet ,as born

Sanm noble spirts, ju;giginby themfelv r, [me.- Swerterl anci befi, gentieft and bravel Ipiri',
'.iy yet coljerture wht l might have srov' i, That ricr Ilfes'd the wlil! Wietch hiit I an,
And think life only wanting ;o my fanic '-Vho law har noblr fDirit swell and rile
Bri' whn ihall comfort the ? Above the nnrrmv- I'miri th.at consi:'d it ?

Ldl PR. Defpiir, despair ! [.:lv Y-t nc-cr .; a by all :hj virt es w:on
D;;g. Oh, had i: p:ealed high H-arten to let m: I'o 'o :he ju!lc-, an.l ree.nl tle fccrw,

A lit:;it hile '-my eyes tha: gaze on thee V;! ich :imlEy known, ii.i rais'd th-e far r.v:
Grow dim apace! rmy mother- [Dies. Thev il:a;n'siiare, Oh! I am punih'il n, !

Errer Lord Randolph ard Anna. Thclc are the hair trht bouio liave ilr:e'd the
Lsrd R. Thy voorc, thy wuros of truth, havy Andr n-t rhelocks of D.cgi . [rnlondi,

pierc'd my heart; 'i Te. hir: lair., and roSI hi.u f f

S /'C n te -r d.

T am, the ein of ';clg!'.hood arn es arms. Lo-d .. I kno.w the now !

the iboldner I ror:ve ;

Oh' if my brave deliverer farviies My creRis falen. Fr a.he I will aptrint
The tcaitr's (word- 'A p!aee of efti, if rief will l-t thee elt.

,a . Ala s look there, my lord. /am l will re'ard, altho' cann rpuonih.
L;rd A. The mother and her son ! How cu.rl i C'r's'd, curi'd Glenn!von, he efcap'd tooJ e:L.

Tho' fain and bassied by the hand he hated,
Foaming with rage and fury to the lai;,
Curling his conqJeror, the felon died,

E£:trr Anna.

.4nr.a. Mv lord ! My lord !
L'rd R. Spe k: I can hear of horror,
'InJo.. Horror, indeea!
4ord R. Matilda ?

inng. Is no more:

She ran, /he flew like lightning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice the gain'd,
Beneath whose louring top the river falls
Jr.gulph'd in rifted rocks; thi;her ihe came,
As failefs as the eagle iislts upon it,
And headlong dovn-a

Load R. 'I'was. , alas 'twas I

That lill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death I Wrctcl that I am!

G L A S.

4nna. Oh, had you seen her lat despairing lookl

Upon the brinklhe flood, and cafl her eyes'
D.wn in the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? she plung'd herfeif
Into the empty air.

L'rd R. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the pallion of my foul.
Peace in this world I nevercan enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph glve;
They speak aloud, and with the v,,ice no fate
Denouneemy doom. Iam refolv'd. I'l go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mirtrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With'coft and pomp upon their funerals waitt
For Rindulph hoper he never shall return;
;,

"Wri
