- H E
M O D E R A T R.

N.U M B E R II.

HE public has, doubtless, Suffered very
much from my long silence, since the pu-
blication of the firdl number of this paper.

To relieve them from their anxiety, I come now
forth, afluring them that 1 am fill alive, and that,
during this long interval, I have not ceased, though
in a different capacity, to promote the good end I
proposed on my firt setting out. Left any reader
should not be able to call to mind the fibje&-matrer
of my first number, I am, as the title itself may part-
ly-inform him, a champion for the flourishing and
prosperous cause of moderation in the church.

Such, it must be owned, is the thriving and vigp-

tous fate of that great interest at present, that it doth
not appear t6o sand in much need of the afiftance or
support of a periodical writer, or indeed'any writer at
all. This, perhaps, was the reason why our friends
-*howed so little sense of gratitude to my brother the
author of the Ecctieiaflical CharaDterifics, who thought
:fit rto draw his pen in their defence. I am' hovwever
'rather inclined to think, that the gentleman failed in -
the execution of his design. He is plainly of a cold
fyflematic turn, laying down a regular and uniform
plan; which way of writing is at prcfent quite difre-
Jifhed, both in, the world and in the church. 'His.
miscarriage therefore is little or no discouragement. to
me, who intend to use the shorter and more palaiable
.method of eWfaywriting and miscellany. This the
Nolftc- Erl of 8hafte'bu-ry.juftlyecelrates, -uudcitle

; :'*

- ^- A '

'
-c'

/ G . : .....4_..;......D.I......* esó.. .....a':

E 2 )

chara&er of leariied ragout and medley. He was the
first who brought such treatises into reputation among
men of taftc; and shewed how the order, strength,
and elegance of the ancients, might be concealed un-
der the cafe, irregularity, and apparent-confufion of
the modern form. He hath been my delight and pat-
tern from my youth, not without rome tolerable pro-
fit. And in entering upon the present attempt, that
mv periods may run with the fame slipshod nimble-
nels of flylc, for which his Lordlhip was so eminent,
I hope the reader will believe I have uled every form
of invocation.

Another reason may be given for the miscarriage of

the author above named, viz. a wrong choice of his
{hubje. T'here are but three diftin& ends which a
writer in support of any party can be supposed to have
in view. The first is, to answer the obje&ions, and
refute the calumnies, of enemies; the second, to
point out the paths of further improvement; and the
third, to celebrate the charaters of those eminent per-
fIns who are chiefly employed in leading and con-
duting it. The first of these the author of the Cha-
rat-eriItics seems chiefly to have had in his eye; and
therein he discovered the weakness of his judgment.
Nothing can be more fbolifh in a party-writer, than
to busy hlmlielf in answering objecions. It is always
a confession, and to many an information, that fiuch
objections are or may be made: and as the world hath
a far greater tendency to believe ill than well of
others, so it requires both longer time, and a ftrongcr
comprchenlion, to understand the answer to an objec-
tion, than to perceive the force of the objection itself.
A deep wound may be given in a moment; but it
takes a long time, as well as the application of reme-
dies, effectually to cure it; and sometimes it is impof-

B M ~fible

t 3 1*

fiibe wholly'tb remove the scar. iThe rame thing
tifes also often to bring to my mind the throwing of dirt
upon a well-drefred lady, which, after you have wiped
off with ever so great care, is flill apt to leave some
slain.

For these reasons, I despise the work of answering

objetions. And there is the left occasion for it in our
cafe, because we are not now striving for power, but
using it. We are poffeTied of absolute and supreme
command; and if' at any time a remaining enemy do
presume to throw out a reflection against us, secure of
dominion, we glory in our strength, and mock the
ineffecual dart. As similitudes ieem to flow upon me
At present in great plenty, I must give them vent;
aifuring the reader, that, as all comparisons ought to
do, they present themselves arising naturally out of
the subjet, and ate not industriously hunted for by
me, and forced into the service. Once more then,
we tefemble a traveller, who may be fbmetimes an-
toyed with the yelping of a cur at his horle's. heels
upon the road. It would be both below his dignity,
and would but more provoke the animal, to speak to
him, or command him away; and therefore he ought
wholly to despise the impotent and feeble fury, un-
less the creature be so incautious as to come within his
reach, and then he may take signal and heroic ven-
geance, and give him a mortal blow in return for his
barking.

Leaving then this vindicating and objeEion-anfwer-

ing method, as unprofitable or hurtful, it is upon the
second and'third views of a party-writer that my pre-
sent and following papers are to turn, viz. pointing
out the measures proper to be followed, and celebra-
ting the chara&ers of those who lead the way. With
this design, my first number endeavoured to dire& the

A 2 citizcns
Cs

Er 4 1

citizens of the capital of this church and nation in the
choice of three paflors to supply so many vacant char-
ges. In that instance the vitory was not complete;
yet my attempt was not wholly ineffetual, if the
world and my friends have not flattered me. I intend-
ed also to have given directions in the last eleCtion,
and was moved by several persons so to do; but came
too late by the precipitate conduct of the managers of
that affair. However, there are a few things for the
public emolument, which I shall now humbly pro-
pose. Some of them, indeed, a penetrating eye may
easily, from the present tendency and course of
things, discern to be future. Such may lightly e-
fteem my proposals, as being little else than what will
naturally happen in a short time: but, betides that I
llall add some things not quite fb obvious, even these
future blessings are of such value, that I shall reckon
my pains well bestowed, if I contribute in any mea-
sure to accelerate their approach.

ijt, Let it be observed, that there is a great penury

of m- s at present in this c-h fit for the
M r'srchair. This is evident from the two last
elections. In the first of them, a public teacher *
was chosen, a creature equivocally generated between
a c--- n and layman, like a mule, who is neither
horse nor ass. In the other, a well-known person
was chosen for the second or third time, who is now
in the decline of life and character, and, being a great
lover of pre-eminence, is put to very hard flifts to
preserve it. Having long served the great with the
most assiduous and llavifh fubjetion, he is at last re-
duced to the still more ignoble servitude, of flattering
and cajoling beardless boys, that he may be suffered
to go before them.

This is the phrase which that gentleman always uses il-
lead of Minider of the Gfrel. .-,'*/ -*e .~, ./--,i)

5

It is therefore proposed, that the ancient cufromn

which prevailed in Mr George Buchanan's time, be
revived, of chufing a layman. The benefits that
may arise from this alteration, will occur to every
reader; and therefore I wholly pass them, and hum-
bly recommend to the choice of the ensuing a--- y,
Sopho, whose learning, piety, and other qualifica-
tions, are evident from his writings, and his flarion.
This honour would serve to wipe off some unjust
aspersions which have been thrown upon him in for-
mer afemblies. For my part, I heartily approve of
him, both as a man and as a writer ; and find no fault
in his eflays, except a starting and convulsive motion.
in the flyle, which was probably owing to some dif-
order in his nervous system.

D- H- , Efq; might also be on the leer,

becaufc, like Buchanan, he has been a governor to
young gentlemen, and is a great admirer of K. James,
who was Buchanan's pupil. Like him too, he is an
historian; at least it is said he has written, and is wri-
ting a history. However, I wish Sopho may carry
the chair, because Mr H - seems to have some-
thing of a..party-man about him; whereas Sopho's ca-
tholic principles about the delusory nature of con-
Science, in which he is really of no body's, and, by
consequence, in the centre of every body's opinion,
mufft incline him to hear all fides with the utmost im-
partiality.

2dly, It is proposed, that the Edinburgh booksel-

lers concerned in Mr H- 's history should present
a petition to the committee of bills, bearing, " That
" whereas Mr D- H- hath, with incredible
" pains, and patience, written a history, wherein great
" honour is done to the church of Scotland, by Ihew-
' ing, that she excels all other churches in the purity

A3 "of

' of her worShip and discipline; and this reprefenta.

" tion being evidently given by the author, not from
<€ any prejudice in favour of the church of Sotland,

but from an inadvertent regard, for once, to truth,

~' it muff therefore make a deeper imprefllon upon the
" minds of Mr H--'s admirers in and about Edin-

burgh, and dispose them, as soon as they ihall be-
" come serious, and fettled in any principles at all, to

join in communion with the church of Scotland
yet so it is, that the book does not fell, except a-

" mong these fame admirers of his at Ed:nburgh; and

'your petitioners, through the corrupt taste of the
" age, are like to lose L. 400 Sterling;" therefore
yraying " to be indemnified to that extent out of his
I MaPjcty's bounty of L. iooo, or that the whole
"impression be bought up by the society for propa-
" gating Christian knowledge, to be dispersed in the
· highlands and islands, whL.re it may be very useful
" in preventing the growth of Popery, and, by the
"f fine style in which it is written, serve to introduce
*' the Enlifh language."

3d/y, That, as the world has been long plagued and

tired with endless repetitions in sermons upon religious
subje&s, which have alto a woful tendency to keep a-
live enthusiasm and iuperltition; therefore every

--- r in Scotland, for a year to come, shall preach

on the different branches of trade and manufature,
(in towns), and of agriculture, (in landward parishes),
This would relieve men from the gloom of devotion
mentioned by Mr H- in his history, and would agree
better with the Scotch taste than pi&ures or processions.
It would certainly make the congregations of rome de-
ferted pastors thronger than before, and prevent peo-
ple from sleeping when they do attend; as the young
gentlemen might pofiibly underfiand something of

these

these subje&s, and mlgni also probably speak with a
little more force and energy than they uCually do. It
would likewise draw the country-gentlemen to church,
who have so long utterly deserted it; and would be a
mean of good correspondence between the m-- r
and his heritors, whom he mutl consult upon the ap-
plicatory part of every sermon, left he mislead their
-tenants. For the fame reason, no discourse on agricul-
ture to be preached at tents, because of the difference
of foil in the many different parishes from which the
people are aflembled. So that tent-fermons must ei-
ther be wholly laid aside; or the young preachers, and
others, muff keep in general terms, and recommend a-
griculture, as they used to recommend, formerly ho,
liness, and now virtue, without any particular direc-
tions.

bthlv, The Edinburgh society may be desired to

give a premium of five or ten pounds, for the belt ser-
mon on each of the above fubjets. This will be a way
of augmenting flipends, to which I cannot think of a-
ny reasonable objection. The landed interest surely
could nor in honour oppose it. On the contrary, it
might be expe&ed, that they would voluntarily aug-
ment every minister's stipend, in proportion as his ser-
mons ihould enable them to augment the rent of their
lands.

Since the gentlemen of that laudable and useful so-

cicty have publicly solicited correspondents to suggest
any amendments or alterations that occur to them up-
on the scheme, I venture further to obfcrve, that the
premium for the best discovery in the sciences, which
has not been given to any body, ought to have been
given to D- H- , Efq; for his discovery in the
science of morals, that health, tleanlineJs, taper legs,
and broad lhoulders, are capital virtues; and a running

fore

r 3

fore an unpardcinable crime. --This I take to be the
most extraordinary discovery of its kind that hath been
made in-this century. And if the gentleman's mode-
fly prevented his applying to the society, since the
thing is well known, he ought not to susser on that ac-
count. Some notice ought also to be taken of him
for a discovery in the art of writing for conviction,
which he hath prafifed with so much success, viz. to
be sceptical and uncertain upon every point in which the
world is generally agreed, and positive and peremptory
in such things as never entered into any head but his
own.

Leaving these proposals to the consideration of the

persons severally interested in them, proceed we now
to gratify the expectation of the public, by paying the
tribute of praise to the illustrious tragedy of Dougias,
lately represented upon our own proper theatre, and
the author of which is known to be a gentleman, and
public teacher, of our own proper country. Fame is,
by the concurrent testimony of all ages, the reward due
to poets; and witiout it they are less able to subsist in
their character of poets, than they can continue their
natural life without bread. I will not therefore be so
barbarous or unjust, as to refute the fair and equal
claim; but shall do my best; acknowledging, at the
fame time, thai it is far below his merit; and promi-
sing, that if, at any time hereafter, I lhall find my
lungs more vigorous, and fitter for the purpose, I will
let the trumpet again to my mouth, and give him still
a louder blast,

And here, I am sensible, it is not proper to enter

upon the particular beauties of this matchless compofi-
tion, which is not yet published, left the world lhould
arraign it as partial praise, coming from an intimate
friend, perhaps one. of that small and fele& number

who

who were admitted behind the scenes. Waiting then
till the publication, before we praise the ftruture of
the piece, what I now commend is, the attempt in ge-
neral, so very uncommon and bold, of introducing
upon the stage, a play written by a minister of the go-
fpel, and attended by a felet band of the fame ancient
order. What a mortal blow to every enemy of mode-
ration ? Mark ! how the furious bigot flands astonish-
ed, his rage repressed with wonder! And fee! the
gloomy enthusiast flies with terror to his cell, upon the
exhibition of this new and extraordinary character uponr
the larger stage of the world! How will these mo-
ping and narrow-minded judges, who lately found the
stage contrary to law, and vainly dreamed it hurtful to
the people, now hide their heads for shame, when
they hear this potent advocate rife up and plead the in-
jured cause, and fee hoary senators and pious clergy
crouding to the theatre? How shall the light of the
clergy now shine with redoubled lufire, when they
shall be no more overgrown with the rust of fingulari-
ty and restraint, but polished by collision with the
world, and flamped with the very form of virtue, by
attending the inJfruzive stage ? And how happily
shall they give as well as receive improvement, when
the mixture of senatorial robes, and sacerdotal vest-
ments, with the gay clothing of these elegant assem-
blies, mhall add severity to sprightliness, and corre&
the levity of fashion ?

Animated by the inspiring theme, I begin to feel

the impulse of prophetic fury. Methinks I fee a race
of theatrical divines, following the footfleps of this
adventrous bard. He having burst the bars of the fe-
parating inclofure, and trampled under foot the mon-
fler of popular resentment, which flood on guard, be-
hold the emancipated clergy exulting in their liberty,

and

0
io 3

and viewing, with ravilied eyes, the scenes of pled;
rure, for which they have now exchanged their own
melancholy cloiffters. 0 happy period of time, when
virtue and freethihking, having put to flight every re-
ligious adversary, are now in poffeflion of the long
contested field ! 0 happy ators, and more happy. ac-
trelfes, who, instead of being shunned and contemned
by all except the loose and diflolute, are now become
the darlings of the clergy, who glory in their com-
merce with your persons, and indultrioufly vindicate
your cause !

I beg the reader's pardon for this impetuoty of style,

into which I have been unwarily hurried by the sub-
jet of my discourse. 1 do indeed think, that the ge-
nius of this tragic author hath the power of converting
every thing that touches it into its own nature. It is
known to be of infinite force and fire, disdaining vul'
gar bounds, and flying the beaten path. What rich
variety of apt epithets, and living metaphor ? What
bold and noble sallies of imagination, springing not
only to the utmost verge.of probability, but even
touching the very borders of extravagance ? And,
from what has just now happened to myself in the ce-
lebration of his praise, it is plain, that if I had not
suddenly drawn the reins, I should have been borne,
by ungoverned fancy, into a land of monsters, great.
er than ever were bred on Mount Caucasus, or by the
green banks of the river -anaander.

But now let me march with a little more composure

and recollection, and remember, that I am not in a land
of monsters, but in a land of players; and congratula-
ting the world upon the happy effets of the tranfla-
tion of our author, from the pulpit. to the stage, and
the door now opened for the admission of the clergy
to that improving amusement. These effeEs it is im-

pofllble

L 1i ]

poflible for me to enumerate within the compass of
this paper; and therefore, leaving the greatest part of
them as the fubje& of future animadversion, let me on-
ly observe, that D- H- Efq; will have no
more occafi n to fay, as he does in one part of his
works, thai the calling and office of a minister is an
almost insurmountable impediment to the practice of
virtue. Among other reasons which he gives for this
assertion, is the following, That they are obliged to
put on the appearance of more'fan&ity and devotion
than it is poflible for any man to possess; and this un-
avoidable hypocrisy debauches the mind, and ruins
their integrity. Now, though it may be difficult to
determine what is the greatest degree of fanftity and
devotion which a man may really possess; and though
1 will allow with D- H -, who doubtless hath
made the trial, that it is very small : yet it can never
be affirmed, that our divines who attend the theatre
have the appearance of more, because they have not
the appearance of any at all.

1 was indeed sorry to find this remark in my friend

D- d, which plainly shows, that the greatest men
have not always their wits about them; for it furnishes
a handle to his enemies to renew their charge against
him as a Papist. They will fay, The man has betrayed
himself: if he was not abroad in person when he
wrote this, his thoughts must have been abroad in Ro-
man-Catholic countries, presenting to his imagination
the auflerity of the several orders of regulars in that
religion. As to Protestant clergy, or those of his own
.country, he could not lo much as form an idea of
them, but by experience and feeling. Reajfn could
not help him out. Now,, who are the clergy with
whom D- H- corresponds, and from whom
he must form a judgment of the reft ? Are they over-

burdened

1burdened with apparent san&ity ?' Tieir eneiimeg-
themielves will not so much as pretend it. -I hope,
therefore, that in the next edition he will either wholly
leave out this pafage, or at least make an honourable.
exception in favour of the moderate clergy of his own
dear country, where all things are at present going on
so very wondrous well.

I shall conclude this paper with the following liort

epigram of an anonymous author, and a paraphrase
upon it.
On a little name, which has produced three great heroes

to support the declining glory of Britain. 1756.
An impious j---e, a wicked sceptic lage,
A ftage-playing priest; O glorious NAME and AGE 1
What is the glory-and honour of any slate or

church ? Is it not politeness in the one, and mildness
and moderation in the other ? Do not then these three
gentlemen promote the. glory of this church and na-
tion ? Is it not our honour to tolerate the two first ?
is it not both our honour and happiness td have pro-
duced, nourilhed, and to possess the last ?

P. S. Left the interval between my second and

third .paper should be longer than I expef, I beg
leave to propose, that, in the lift of premiums by the
Edinburgh society for the year 1757, betides those
hinted above, may be the following.

To.the m-r who leaves his parifl oftoneft and

longest,' with very short intervals of refidenae, and,
at the fame time, has made his people so truly mode-
rate, that they neither know, nor inquire, nor care,
'whether he be at home or abroad, a fum of money e-
qual to a fupervifor-of excise's travelljng-charges .

CPrice Two PENCE.] BHoM
