':> ' . * '") ;'

tHE
Dramatic Works

O F

",

L O N D 0 N:
Printed for A. MILLAR in the Strand.

MDCCLX.,

LTIIL

# TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS GEORGE PRINCE of WALES.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS

G E O R G E

PRI N CEof WALES.

S I R,
IN Dedications, especially those which

Poets write, Mankind expea to find

little Sentiment, and less Truth. A
grateful Imagination adorns its Benefactor
with every Virtue, and even flatters with
Sincerity. Hence the Portrait of each
Patron of the Muses is drawn with the
fame Outline, and finished as a Model of
PerfeEion. Inftru&ted by the Errors of
others, I presume not to make the Pane-

A 2 gyrick

gyrick of the Prince of: WALES, norto.
extol the Patronage of Literature as the
most shining Quality of a Prince. Your
Royal Highness will permit me to men-
tion one fort of Patronage which can
never be praised too much; that, I mean,
which extending its Influence to the whole
Society, forms and excites the Genius of
Individuals by exalting the Spirit of the
State.

Iniititutions, that revive in a great and

highly. civilized People those Virtues of
Courage, Manhood, and Love of their
Country, which are most apt, in the Pro-
grefs of Refinement, to decay, produce at
the fame time that pleasing and ornamen-
tal Genius, which cannot subsist in a Mind
that does not partake of those Qualities
which it describes. This is an Obferva-

tion

tion which has escaped the Notice of the.
greater Part of Writers, who have inqui-
red into the Causes of the Growth and
Decay of Poetry and Eloquence; but it has
not escaped the Penetration of LONGINUS,
who writing in the Decline of. the ROMAN
Empire, and lamenting that the true Sub-
lime was not to be found in the Works of
his Time, boldly imputes that Defet to
the Change of Policy; and enumerates with
Indignation the Vices of Avarice, Effemi-
nacy, and Pusillanimity, which arising from
the Loss of Liberty, had so inthralled and
debased the Minds of Men, that they could
not look up, as he calls it, to any thing
elevated and sublime: And here, as in
other Questions, the great Critic quotes
the Authority of his Master HOMER. The
Day of Slavery bereaves a Man of half his
Virtue, The Experience of fuicceeding

Times

Times has Ihewn that Genius is affected
by Changes less violent than the Loss of
Liberty; that it ever flourishes in Times
of Vigour and Enterprize, and langui/hes
amidst the sure Corruption of an inactive
Age.

Your Royal Highness, as Heir appa.

rent of the Briti/h Empire, hath in view
the noblest Field that ever a laudable Am-
bition entered. The envied State of this
Nation cannot remain precisely as it is;
the Tide must flow, or ebb faster than i:
has ever flowed. A Prince defilned in
such a Period to reign, begins a memorable
]Era of PerfeHtion or Degeneracy. The
serious Cares and princely Studies of your
Youth, the visible Tenor of your generous
and constant Mind, have filled the Breasts
of all good Men with hopes of you equal

to

to their Withes. That these Hopes may
be fulfilled in their utmost Extent, is the
sincere and ardent Prayer of

Tour Royal Highness's

mloft humble,

zmol obedient,
and mofl devoted Servant,

JOHN HOME.

D O U G L A-S:

A
TR AGEDY.

As it is A C T E Dat the
THEATRE-R OYAL

IN

COVENT-GARDEN.
Non ego fum vtafes, fed prifei confiui avit

# PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

P R L O G U E.

Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.

N antient times, .when Britain's trade was arms,
And the lov'd mujic of her youth, alarnss; .

Agod-like race fi/flain'dfair-England'sf)ame :
Whp has not heard of gallant'iPE-gr's ;namne?
Ay, and of DOUGLAS ? Such illufrious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose
From age to age bright Jhoe the Britillifre, .-...
And every hero was a hero's fire.
When po'werfulfate decreed one warrior's doom,
Up prung the phenix from his parent's tomb,.
But whilf thofegenerous ri.valsfo ght andifell,
Those generous rivals ;lo.d each other zvell .
Tho' many a bloodj fie ld as loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done.
When PIERCY wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers,
'Farf came the DOUGLAS, Swith his Scottish /fears;
And, when proud Do v P. A s- made his King his foe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his English bow.
Expell'd their natire homnes by ade/f.rterfifte,: . '

,hey knock'd alternate at each other's gate: :

Then blaz'd the cafle, at the midnight hour,
For r mfwhofe 'arms hadlhok its firmefl tow'r.

This night a DOUcLAS your proteCion claims;

A wife! a mother ! Pily'sffeft names:
The flory of her woes indulgent hear,
And grant your suppliant all he begs, a tear.
In confidence Jhe begs; and hopes to find
Each English Breast, 1ke noble PIERCY'J, kind.

B Z DRAMATIS

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE, As represented at LONDON.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE,

As representcd at LONDON.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. RIDOUT;

GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY.

STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS.
SERVANTS.

WOMEN.
MATILDA, Lady RAN- lM.W) o iGo

DOLPHI, Mrs. WOFlINTONó
ANNA, Mrs. VNCINT.

# PROLOGUE. Spoken at EDINBURGH.

PROLOGUE.

Spoken at EDINBURGH.
IN days of lafc fame, qwhen Persia's Lord

Opos'd his millions to the Grecian sword,

Fluri/h'd the jate of Athens, fmal herflore,
Rugged her/oil, and rocky waJ her hore,
Like Caledonia's: yetJhe gain'd a name
That sands unrival'd in the rolls offame.

Such proud pre-eminence not valour gave,

(For wvho than Sparta's dauntlefsfons more brave ?)
But learning, and the love of every art,
?hat Virgin Pallas and the Mde~ impart.

Above e the re the Tragic Muse admir'd

Each Attic Brea/f with noble/ Pafionsfir'd.
In peace their poets with their heroes har'd
Glory, the hero's, and the bard's reward.
The Tragic Muse each glorious record kept,
And, o'er the kings he conruer'd, Athens wept *.

Here let me cease, impatient for the cene,

Toybu I need not praise the Tragic Queen:
Oft has this audienee joft compajion ho.wn
To woes o/ heroes, heroes not their own.
This night ourfcenes no common tear demand,
He comes, the hero ofyour native land!
DorGLAs, a name thro' all the world renown'd,
A name that rouses like the trumpet's found!
Oft haveyorfathers, prodigal of lfe,
A DouGLAs folloiw'dthro' the bloody rife;

B 3 HIs
* Se tle PR8sAl of^fchyllus,

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE, As represented at EDINBURGH.

- f vi ]

HolIs have leen .nwon at that dread name toyield,
And, DOUGIAS dead, his niamse hath -'an the field.

Li len attentive to the avarious tale,

, Mark if the author's kindredfeelingsfail;

Sqway'd bj alternate hopes, alternatefears,
Re 'waits the test ofyour congenial tears.
Ifthey fiallfow,.hack to the MujM heflies,

nd bids your heroes infucejeeion rife;
ColleEs the woandring rwarriors as they roam,
DOUGLAS afYres them of a 'wleome-home.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE,

As represented at EDINBURGH.

Lord RANDOLPH, . Mr. YOUNGER,

GLENALVON, Mr. LOVE.

NORVAL, DOUGIAS, Mr. DIGGS.

STRANGER, Mr. HAY MAN.
SERVANTS, &C.

WOMEN.

MATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mrs. WARD.
ANNA, Mrs. HOPKINS.

# DOUGLAS: A TRAGEDY.

D O U G L A S:

A . -
T R A G E D Y.

A C T I.
hbe court of a castle surrounded with woos.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.
yW 7E woods and wilds,-whofe melancholy gloom

Accords with myfoul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,

Farewel a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your shades I deem tome spirit dwells, .
Who from the chiding stream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and anflers.to MAT ILDA'S moan.
0 DOUGLAS ! DOUGLAS! if departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the paflion of immortals hear'lt
My.lamentation: hear'it thy wretched wife
Weep for her hufband.flain; her infant loft.

B 4. My

My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn ;
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O disregard me not; tho' I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my DOUGLAs, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguish, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPPH.

Again these weeds of woe! fay, dolt thou well
To feed a pafion which consumes thy life?
The living claim Come duty; vainly thou
Bestow's thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn:
Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance live3.
This fatal day stirs my time-fettled sorrow,
Troubles afrems the fountain of my heart.

Lord RANDOLPH.

W'hen was it pure of sadness ! These black weeds
Express the wonted colour of thy mind,
For ever dark and dismal. Seven long years
Are pais'd, since we were join'd by sacred ties:
Clouds all the while have hung upon thy brow,
Nor broke, nor parted by one gleam ofjoy.

Time,

Time, that wears out the trace ofdeepefR anguish,
As the sea smooths the prints made in the sand,
Has pal o'er thee in vain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

If time to come

Should prove as ineffectual, yet, my Lord,
Thou canst not blame me. When our Scottish youth
Vy'd with each other for my luckless love,
Oft I besought them, I implor'd them all
Not to assail me with my father's aid,
Nor blend their better destiny with mine.
For melancholy had congeal'd my blood,
And froze affeftion in my chilly breast.
At las my Sire, rous'd with the base attempt
To force me from him, which thou rend'red'ft vain,
To his own daughter bow'd his hoary head,
Besought me to commiserate his age,
And vow'd he should not, could not die in peace,
Unless he saw me wedded, and fecur'd
From violence and outrage. Then, my Lord!
In my extreme distress I call'd on thee,
Thee I befpake, profefs'd my firong desire
To lead a single, solitary life,
And begg'd thy Nobleness, not to demand
Her for a wife whose heart was dead to love.
How thou perfifted'i after this, thou know't,
And mud confers that I am not unjust,
Nor more to thee than to myfelfinjurious,

B 5 LorW

-Lord RANDOLPH. .

That I confefi;. yet ever must regret
The griefI cannot cure. Would thou wert not
Compos'd of grief.and tenderness alone,
But had't a spark of other paflions in thee,
Pride, anger, vanity, the strong desire
Of admiration, dear to woman-kind;
Thefe.might contend'with,'and allay thy grief,
As meeting tides and currents smooth our firth.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To such a cause the human mind oft owes
Its transient calm, a calm I envy not.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
F6r when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh !'rakenot up the ashes of my fathers:
Implacable resentment was:iheir crime,
Andpgievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallsit lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so itern,
I had not been the last of all my.race.

Lord RAND6LPH.
Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.

~ .; ~' '
' " ..;' I never

I never aik'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the' breais of fancy's childreii burns.
Decent affetion arid complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wisi'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret riy eyes behold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I Ihould perih by the Danish sword,
MATILDA would not -ied one tear the more.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou do'st not think so: woeful as I am,
1 love thy merit, and eteem thy virtues.
But whither go'ft thou now ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on the tip-toe Rands
Of expectation, and impatient aiks
Each-who arrives, if he is come to-tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady RANDOLPH.

0, nmay adverse wihds,

Far from the coat of Scotland, drive their fleet!
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace ard safety to'his'pleafant home-!

Loid RANDOLPH.

Thou fpeak'ft'a worman's. hear a warrior's vifi..:
Rigiht froi their'native land; the ftormi y' noirtih
May the wind blow, till every klieel'isfix'd'
Immoveable in 'Caifdoia.'s' iaihd ·

''B6:
- 6 Th'en

Then hall our foes repent their.bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal hore.

Lady RANDOLP. - .

War I detert: but war with foreign foes, '" '
Whose manners, language, and whose looks are firange,
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that wihich with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line,.
By fancy drawn, divides the 'ifted kingdoms.
On each fide dwells apeople similar,.
As twins are to each other; valiant both;
Both for their-valour famous thro' the world.
-Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they mufl have-war, wage distant war,
But with each other fightin cruel conflct
Gallant in firife, and noble in their ire,
The batte is theirpaflime. They go forth
Gay in the'morning, as tofummerfport;
When ev'ning comes, the glory ofthe-morn,
The youthful.warrior is-a clodof clay.. .
Thus fall the primeof either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars -.

Lord RANDaLPH,.

I'll hear no.more: this melody would make -
A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquefls he has made;
Yea, (like a monk), sing ref and peace in heav'n:
To fouls of warriors inhis.battles fain. - . .:. .
Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone;'
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light, Ex.h

Entey '

:Enter ANA.
ANNA. *ANNA.. - -

Forgive the rafhnefsof your AkNkA's love:
Urg'd by affetion, I:have thus prefuiu'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you negle&,
And lose in sadness.

Lady RANDOLPH.

So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of.time.

ANNA.

To blame thee, Lady, fuits-not with my state:
But sure I am, since death'firil prey'd on-man,
Never did sifter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loil,
In early youth, the hulband of.your heart P

Lady RANDQLPIH.
Oh!

ANNA.

Have I diftrefs'd you with officious love,
And ill.tim'd mention of your brother's fate- P
Forgive me, Lady: humble.tho' am, .
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So ferventlyI love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away. -

Lady RANDOLP H.

What power direaed.thy unconcious tongue
To speak as thou hatdbne ? to name-

AN 'An

I know not:

But since my words have made niy mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with her's.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No, thou ihalt not be silent.

I'i! trauf thy faithful love, and thou ihalt be
Hencebonh th' inftruted partner of my woes.
But what avails it Can thy feeble pity
Roil bac'k the flood of never ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead live ?

ANNA.

What means my noble mistress ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Didf thou not as what had nmy sorrows been. --.
If I in early youth had loft a husband ?--
In the coid bosom ofthe earth is lodg'd,
Mangi'd with wounds, the hufband-dfrmy'youth;
And in sone cavern es the ocean lies
My child and his.-

A' N'A.

0! Lady, moft-rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words'
Deign to unfold.

Lady RA ND'Oni .

Alas ! ai' aticiet'ff'ufd,
Hereditary evil, was the source

8 Of

Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decree'1,
That my brave brother should in battle save
The life of DOUGLAs' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
To fee the vaunted fiterof his friend-
Impatient, Don GLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name -- My heart he galn'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's pretence authoris'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little'weeks, with wings of down,
Had o'er us flown, when'my lov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and'with him,
In spite ofall my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, when my fern Sire was told
That the false firanger was Lord DOU GLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the Baron drew his sword,
And qdefion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er wwould
WedoneofDouGLAs' nanme. Sincerity,
Thou firfi of virtues; let'no mortal leave
Thy onward path ' altho' the earth ilould gape,
And from the gulph of hell detrultion cry
To take dissimulation's winding way.

ANNA.

Alas! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truh so hardy I

t ady

Lady RANDOLPH.

The firR truth

Is eafiet to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale,---
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DoUGLAS and my brother both were lain.
My. lord! my life! my:hufband !-- Mighty God!
What had Idone to meritfich affli&ion ?

ANNA.

My dearef Lady! -many a tale of tears
I've lifien'd to; but never did I hear
A tale 6o fad as this.

Lady RANDOLPIH.

In the fir days

Ofmy dilfracting grief, I found inyfelf - .
As women wiih to be who love their Lords.
Butwho durst tell my father ? The good prielt
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With hislov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,-
Till time /hould make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her filler's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I everfeen
Or heard of, ANNA, since that, fatal hour.
My murder'd child! - had thy fond mother sear'd -
The loss of thee, 1he had loud fame defy'd,

Defpisa

i Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And.wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

I . ~ANNA. ,
Not sien nor heard.of! then perhaps he lives.

I . . Lady RANDOLPH. ;

No. It was dark December : wind and rain
Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay .
The deflin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child. -
Ohaplefs on ! of a molt haplefs.fire!- ..
But they are both at reft ; and I alone
Dwell in:this world of woe, condemn'd to.walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my.painful rounds .
Nor has despiteful fate terinit.td me .
The comfort of a folitary:forrow.'" ,
Tho'dead to.love :I was compell'd'to wed:
:RANDOLPH,- ho fnatch'd me from a villain'iis i
And RANDOLPH now polfelfes the domains,. .;, '
That by SirMALCOLM'S death on me devolv'dl .
Domains, that ihould to DOUvLAS 'Con have giv'na
A Baron's title, and a Baron's power.i;..:.. .
Such were my Toothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of afobunborn.
And when that foni came, like a ray from heav'n,.
Which shines and disappears; alas ! my child l
How.long did thy fond'mother grasp. the hope.
Of having thee, (he knew not how, reftoird.
Year after year hath worn her hope.away;
But left ftilundiminilh'd her desire. .

AuiA;:

ANNA.

The hand, that spins 'th' uneven threadof life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come ofyour's,

LADY RANDOLPH. -

.

Not in this world: I have coififder'd well
Its various evils, and on whom they fill.
Alas ! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affeEtion prove the spring of woe.
0 ! had I died.when my lov'e hiiband fell
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

- ANNA.

That God, whose ministers good angels are,
Hath ihut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we mult leave this theme: GLENALVON cdomes.
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitlierwards he'lowly lbalks his way.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will avoid him. An ungracious person
Is doubly irkfomie in an hour like this.

ANNA.
Why speaks my Lady thus of RANDOLPH'S heir?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Because he's not the heir of RANDOLPH'S virtues.
Subtle ahdfhrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial'image of hiifclf:
And he with ease can vaiy to the tate

Of

Ofdifferent men, its .features. Self-deny'd,,
And naiter of his appetites he seems-:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As in GLENAL VON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,-
And itands aloft in there unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the cafle. -

Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

AINA.

O happiness ! where art thou to be found ?
I fee thou dwelleft not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth arrayd .
Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle Lady mifs'd thee not.

Einter GLEN AL VON.

GLENAL VON.

What dof thou muse on, meditating maid ?
Like some cntranc'd and visionary seer -
On earth thou iland'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

ANNA.

Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a seer,
To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd !

GLENALVON.

Wfiat dost thou doubt of? what had thou to do
With fubjeats intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,..

Cannot

Cannot be quelion'd: think of thefre good gifts,
And then thy contemplations will be plealing.

ANNA.

Let womlen view yon monument of woe,
Then boaR of beauty: who so fair as he ?
But I mur folow: this revolving day
Awakes :he memory of her antient woes.

[Exit ANNA,

GLELA Vo N _IOjr,

So! LadyRXAoLP Ihuns me; by and by
I'11 woo her as the lion Wones his brides.
The deed's a-doing now, that makes me lord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power
The season is molt apt; my founding leps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
RAnDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the a4cendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd thedame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd, and had :he Lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation!
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harve/R. Yet I am not safe:
By love, 6r Something like it, flung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my paflion to his wife,
And The has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will 1 do not know:
But well I know the Baron's wrath is deadly.

I will

I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
.Who lands betwixt me and my chief desire.

1o bar but he; the has no kinsman near;
:No brother in his fifler's quarrel bold;.
iAnd for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
know no chief that will defy GLENALVON.

End of the FIRST ACT.

ACT

A C T IL

A Court, &c.
Enter Servants, and a Stranger at ane door, and Lay

RANDOLPH and ANNA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.
W HA T means this clamour? Stranger! speak

secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd? have there rudemen prefum'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

First SERVANT.

By us no stranger ever fuffer'd wrong:
This man with outcry wild has cail'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RASDOLPH and young man, with their

fcords drawn and blody.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Not vain the Stranger's fears ! how fares my Lord ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

That it fares well, thanks to this gallant youth,
Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death !

As .

As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At'the crols way four armed men attack'd me:

Covers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Fad not this brave and generous Stranger come,
ike my good angel, in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
;hey turn'd upon him: but his. active arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they rose no more,
The fierceit two; the others fled amain,
lnd left him mailer of the bloody field.

peak, Lady RAN DoLPH: upon.Beauty's tongue.
well accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
peak, noble Dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

'Lady RANDOLPH.

y Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.
y heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
nd to this noble youth, who, all unknown
o you and yours, deliberated not,
oor paus'd at peril, but, humanely brave,
ought on your fide, against such fearful odds.
ave you yet learn'd of him, whom we Ihould thank
/hom call the saviour of Lord RANDO LPH'S life?

Lord RANDOLPH.

ask'd that quellion, and he anfwer'd not:
But I mu know who my deliverer is. (to the Stranger.)

STRANGER.

A low-born man, of parentage obscure,.:'
Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

Lord

LordRANDoLPrH.

Whoe'er thou art, .thy.fpirit is ennobl'd
By the great King of kings ! thou art ordain'd
And ftamp'd a hero by the Sovereign hand
Of Nature! blulh not, flower of modesty .
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

STRANGER .

My name' is NORVAL : on the Grampian hills
My father feeds his flbcks ; a frugal swain,
'Whose constant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his orilyfon, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike Lord:
And heaven soon granted what my Sire deny'd.
This moon'which rose las night, round as my ihield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce Barbarians, from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The ihepherds fled
For safety and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'dabout the enemy, and mark'd.
The road he took, then halted to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe -.
We fought and conquer'd. E're a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.

Returning

Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The Ihepherd's slothful life: and having heard '
That our good King had-fummion'd his bold Peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron'lide, .
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to condut my fieps;-
Yon trembling coward who forsook his mailer;..
Journeying with thisjntent, I pall these towers,.
And, heaven-direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name. '

Lord RANDOLPH.

He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale
With such a gallant modefly rehears'd:?
My brave deliverer! thou'lhalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame;
I will present thee to our Scottiih King,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour iov'd.
Ha! my MATILDA! wherefore.fiar'ts that tear?

Lady RANDOLPH;

I cannot fay: for various affetions,
And fIrangely mingled, in my bosom fivell; :-
Yet each of them may well command a tear. - . . '-
I joy that thou art safe, and I admire . .
Him and his fortunes who hath' wrought thy safety;.
Yea, as my mind predits, with thine-his own; -
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought, :
Bent upon peril, in the range of death - - .... .
Refolv'd-to hunt for fame, and with his f/{ord :. . .

C To

To gain diutinction which his birth deny'd.
In this attempt unknown he might have perim'd,
And gain'd, with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He flands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his fivord.
On this m mind refleted, whilt you spoke,
And bgefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts!
My deeds shall follow where thou point's the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command iall NORVAL be:

NORVAL.

I know not how to thank you. Rude I am
In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my Lord,
There's Something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NORVAL ne'er will ihame thy favour.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will be sorn thou wilt not. Thou shalt be
My knight; and ever, as thou didft to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Well haft thou spoke. Let meforbid reply. [ToNoRvA L.
We are thy debtors still; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at firlf intended, to the camp.

Some

Some of my train, I fee, are speeding hither,'
Impatient, doubtless, of their Lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes lhall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languilh for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

NORVAL.

Let us be gone, my Lord.
Lord RANDOLPH.

[To Lady RANDOLPi.

About the time that the declining fun
Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expec us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the. feast.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

Exeunt RANDOLPH and NORVAL.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

His parting words have struck a fatal truth;
0 DOUGLAS! DOUGLAS! tenderwas:thetime
When we two parted,. ne'er to meet again-!
How many years ofanguiif and despair

C 2 Ha,

Has heav'n annex'd to those fiviftpaffing hours;
Of love and fondness ! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the.rude breath of fear,
Return'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

ANNA.

May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of peace
Into the wounds that fefer in your breat !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady RANDOLIH.

One only cure can heav'n itfelfbeftow;-
A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am! Alas ! why am 1 so ?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blest the mother of yon gallant NORVA L !
She for a living husband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breaf;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy:
She, with affection's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers:
Whilfi I to a dead husband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

.-* ' ANNA.-

Alas! alas ! why will you thus resume
Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent ynu gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to bestow.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPIH.

Delighted, fay'it thou? Oh! even there mine eye
Found fuel for my life-confuminig sorrow.
I thought, that, had the son of DOUGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant firanger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape; \
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boywith blooming NoRVA L might have numbe'd.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young stranger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan cast upon my care.
Iwill protet thee (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

ANNA.

Sure heav'n will bless so generous a resolve.
You mull, my noble Dame, exert your power:
You must awake.: devices will be fram'd;.
And arrows pointed: at the breat of'NoRVAiL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON'S false and crafty head will work
Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: I only cain.
Bold as he is, GLE-ALV ON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NoRmAL's fortune.
'Tis pleasing to admire! most apt was I
To this affetion in my better days;
Tho' now I seem to you shrunk up, retir'd

C 3 Withiri

Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not sometimes seen an early flower
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch fiveet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blat nipt, pull in its leaves,
'And,.tho' till living, die to scent and beauty!
Emb!em of me: affliidn, like a florm,
Halu kill'd the forward bloffomof my heart.

EnfterGLENALVON.

GLENALVON.
Where ismy deareftkinfinmn, noble RANDOLPH

Lady RANDOLPH.
Have you not heard, GLENALVON, of the bale-.

.GLENALVON.

I have: and that the villains may not 'scape,
With a itrong band I have begirt the' wood.
If they.lurk there, alive:they lhall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of-RAZDOLPH bhir'd their swords,
Orif-

Lady RA-NDOLPH.

That care becomes a kinfinan's love.
I have a counsel for GLENALVON'S ear. [Exit ANRA.

GLENALVON.
To him your counsels always are commands.

Lady RAN DOLPH.
I have not found so: thou art known to me.

GLENA LVON.

'GLENALVON.
Known!

Lady RANDOIPH.'
And miof certain is mycaufe ofknowledge.

GLENALVON.

What do you know ? By the m6ob blessed cross,
You much amaze me. No created being,
Yourself except, durit thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Is guilt so bold! and dost thou make a merit
Of thiy pretended meekness! This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing or, what's worse than that,
Ahn outcast beggar, and unpitied too !
For mortals Shudder at a crime like thine.

GLENALVON.

Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind!
Permit me yet to fay, that the fond iman,
Whom love transports beyond ftriit vitiie's 'bbonds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely isbeibw'd:
For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er theirvain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our Ihepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath against the fanning wind.

C 4 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Reserve these accents for some other ear.
To love's apology I lifen not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou ihould't. '
His brave deliverer RA NDOL PH here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, prafcife ought against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he has in RANDOLPH ;
Whose favourites, I know, thou haft supplanted.
Thou look'it at me, as if thou fain would'lt pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless Stranger my protection claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that I was, to fart at my own shadow,
And be the diallow fool of coward conscience I
I am not what I have been; what I ihould be.
The darts ofdeftiny have alnoft pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I should conclude there was an arm above,
That fought againfl me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare 1 set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Th'imperfec rape to RANDOLPH gave a fpo.fe;

-
. And

And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fan from me;
And, wort of all, a rival. Burning hell '
This were thy centre, if I thought she lov'd him I
'Tis certain she contemns me; nay, commands me,,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And hall I thus be brav'd
Curb'd, as he calls it, by dame chatity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than hate, ambition, and revenge,.
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires,,
And.policy remrorfelefs ! Chance may spoil.
A single aim,; hut perseverance must
Profperat last. For chance and fate are words:.
Perfiftive wisdom is the fate of man.
Darkly a proje&t peers. upon my mind;,
Like the. red moon when rifingin the'eaft,
Crofs'd and divided'by ftrange-colour'd clouds.
Ill seek the slave who came with NbRVAL hither,,
And for his cowardice was fpurned-from him.
I've knownra follbwer's rankled bosom breed'
Venom molt fatal to his heedless Lord. [Exit..

End of the SECOND ACT..

C 5 A. C T'

A C III.
A Court, &c. as before.

Enter AN A.

ANNA:
T HY vassals, Grief! great Nature's order break,

And change the noon-tide to the midnight'hour.

Whilf Lady RANDOLPH sleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness !
Forsake your kies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chace those difinal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celeflial, such as please
The blefs'd above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.

One of the vile affaflins is fecur'd.
We found the villain lurking in the wood:

With

With dreadful irnpPetations'he diiiies
All knowledge'ofth'e crime. But this is fiot
His firt essay: thefe,jewels werie coniiee'd
In the modl secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of foiie that he has murder'd.

ARNNA.

Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart,
The chosen creftof DOUGLAS' Valiant name i
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit MANNA
Enter Servants with a Prifjner.

PRISONER.

I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge tie with.

FirIt SERVANIT.

You ray tso Sir !

But torture fooh fliaTmakyyou speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RANiDOLPH comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA,

ANNA.

Summon your utmdo fortitude, befire
You speak vith him. Your dignity, /your fanie,
Are now at fake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

C6 Lady

/

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou lhalt behold me, with a desperate heart,
Hear howmy infant perifh'd. Seehe kneels.-

[The Pri/oner kinels,]

PRISONER. .

Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and mild!
A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.'
O save me, Lady! from tlefe:cruel men,:
Who have attack'd and feiz'dime; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at.the judgment-feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Of this man's guilt what proof can ye produce ..

First SERVANT.

We found him lurking in the hollow Glynn.
When view'd and call'd.upon, amaz'd, he flead
We overtook him, and. inquir'd from whence
And what he was :..he said, he came from far,.
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not fatisfy'd with this, we fearch'd his cloaths,
And found thefejewels; whose rich value plead
Mot powerfully againfthim. Hard hefeems
And old in villainy.. Permit us try
His tflbbornnefs against the torture's force.

PRISONER.

0 gentle Lady! by your Lord's dear life!
Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail';

And

And by your children's welfare, spare my-age 1 '
Let not the iron'tear my antient joints,: .- -
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain;.

-Lady RANDbLPH.

Account for these: thine own they cannot be r
For these, I fay: be Redfaft to the truth;
Detefed falliood is-mofd certain death..

. A [A.'NA-renoves the Servants ahd returns..

.PRISONER.;

Alas! I'm fore beset ! let never man, . -- .'
For fake of lucre, fin againt his foul.!'
Eternal jutice is in this moftjufl!
i, guiltless now, muRf former guilt reveal.

Lady RANDOLPI. .

O t'ANN A, hear !- once more I charge thee fpeal
The truth dire&: for these to me foretel '
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An inflant and a dreadful death abides tliee; -

*PR ISONER.

Then, thus adjur'd, 1'1l speak: to thee as just.
As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

SOME eighteen years ago,'I rented land'

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S Lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me.and mine-.
(Four helpless infants and-their weeping. mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter. winds..

A little:

A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hardilabour, and the skill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport, - -
Supported life. Whilst thus we poorly liv'd,
One flormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry fpiiitof 'th water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one injeopardy. I rose, arid ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. Thevoicewasceas'd; theperfon lot:
But looking fad and earnet on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirld round and round,,
A basket: soon I drew it to the bank,'
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Was he alive?

PRISONER.

He was.
Lady RANDOLPH.

Inhuman that thou art!
How could'f thou kill what waves and terpels spar'd

PRIsON ER.
I am not so inhuman;

Lady RANXioiPi.

Didit thou not?

ANNA.

.ANNA. -

My noble mifirefs, you are mov'd too much: -
This man has not the alpes of.tern murder;
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's longloft child.

PRISONER. -

The needy man, who has known better days, .
One whom diflrefs-has spited at.-the worll,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the proferous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them;
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant with a hand of harm.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Ha ! dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he lives !

PR ISONER.
Not many days ago he was alive.

Lady RANDOLPH.
O ! God ofheav'n! Did he then die Co lately

PRISONER.

I did not fay he died; I hope he lives.
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourilling in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady RANDOLPH,
Where is he now ?

PRISONER.
Alas! I know not where.

Lady

Lady RANDOIPH.

Oh fate! I fear thee fill. Thou riddler, fpealt:
Direc and clear; else I will search thy foul;

': 'ANNA. '

Permit:me, ever honbur'd-! Kee. impatience,:
Tho' hard to be refrain'd, defeats itself.
Pursue thy ftory.with a faithfultofigue,:. :
To the last hour that thou didft keep the.dcild..

; PRISONR,

Fear not my faith, tho' I mult speak my liarme;
Within the cradle, where the infant lay,'
Was flow'd a mighty Iore of gold and jewels:.
Tempted by which we did resolve to.hide,,
From all the world, this wonderful event, .
And like apeafant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our efitte;
We left the country,. traveli'd to the North,,
Bought flbcks and'herds, and gradually brought forti,
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeingeye-
Beheld our avarice, and smote us fore.
For one by one all our own childr':n died,,
And he, theStranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed washis. Fain thenlwould ,,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd.the boy,.
Have. trufied him, now in the dawn of youth,,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would content. .
Mean while the firipling grew in years and beauty;:
And, as. we oft obfcrv'd, he bore himself,

Not:

ot as the offspring of our cottage blood;
ornature will break out: mild with-the mild,
ut with the forward he was fierce as fire,':
nd night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
set myelf against his warlike bent;
ut all in vain: for when a desperate band
frobbers from the savage mountains came-

Lady RANDOLPH.
ternal Providence! What is thy name ?

PRISONER.
y name is NORVAL; and my name he bears.

Lady RANDOLPH..

Tis he; 'tis he himself! It is my son!
O sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I law !
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.

ANNA.

Just are your transports: ne'er was woman's heart
Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated Dame!
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
Impaffion'd ltrange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady RANDOLP H.

Well dost thou counsel, ANNA: heaven bestow
On me that wisdom which my state requires !

ANNA.

The moments of deliberation pass,
And soon you must resolve. This useful man
Must be difmifs'd in safety, ere my Lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

PRISON E£.

PRISONER.

If I, amidfl akt'nifhment and fear,
Have of your words and gelfures iightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my antient' maser;",
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

L-dy RANDOLPH.

With thee diflimulation now wvere vain.
I am indeed the.daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

PRISONER.

Blefs'd be the hour that made me a poor man !
My poverty hath- fav'd my mailer's house !

Lady RANDOLPil.

Thy'werdsfurprize me: -sure th6u'doll notfeign:
The tcar-ifands -i'thinheye: :fuehl'dte 'fron' thee
Sir MALCOLM'S' house deferv'd not; if aright
Thouttold'ft:th-e fory of thy:6dwn diitefs.

'PRI'SOriXER.

Sir MALCOLM o'f our-Barons was the flbwer;
The faiteftifiend, the best, the;kindelft'iaier:
But- ih'! 'heknewnot bs tiy fad efate.
After that battle, 'where his gallant son,
Your-own'brave brother,-fell, the good old Lord
Grew desperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was' wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrufl out, and them.I blafne,:
May heav'n so judge me as I judg'd my maRer!
And God so love me as I love his race!

Lady

Lady RAN.DOLPH.

is race hall yet reward thee. On thy faith
epends the fate of thy lova mifler's house.
emcmb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
hat like a holy hermitage appears
mong the clifts of Carron?

PRISONER.

I remember
he cottage of the difts.

Lady .RANDOLPH.

'Tis that I mean:

here dwells a man of venerable age,
ho in my father's service spent his youth:
ell him I lent thee, and with him remain,
ill I thall call upon thee to dedlare .

Before the King and Nobles, what thou no.'

o me hall told. -No niote'lutthis, and thou
halt live in:honour all'thy'i ture days:
hy son folong shall call thee'father ftitl,
And all the land lhall bless the 'mah, wh'oiavd
rhe son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou Ihould'ft meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, itill hll hm lo;
And mention nothing of his nobler father.

PRISONER.

Fear not that.I shall mar.fo fair an harvest,
By putting in my fickle 'ere 'tis ripe
Why did I leave my home and antient dame ?
To find the youth to tell him all I knew,

And

And make him wear there jewels in his arms;
WVhich might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so britl'
To light the secret of his noble birth.

[Lay, RANDOLPH goes towards the Servjai

Lady RANDOLPH.

This man is not th' affafin you fufpeted,
Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods against hiz:
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither. ,

[Exeunt Stringer and Seri.at
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My faithful A'NA ! dolt thou share my joy?
I know thou dot. Unparallell'd event!
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift ! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nef ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where hisfatehad thrownh
And tower'd up to the region of his fire!

-". ~ ANNA-.
:ow fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

lterious nature, with the unseen cord
povwerful inifinc, drew you to your own.

Lady RANDOLPH.
:le ready story of his birth believ'd

mpret my fancy quite; nor did he owe

any likeness my so Rudden favour:
now I long to fee his face again,
mine every feature, and find out
elineaments of DOUGLAS, o' my own.
most of all I long to let him know
o his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
d tell him all the itory of his father.

ANNA .

th wary caution you mufl bear yourself
ublic, left your tenderness break forth,
din observers stir conjectures strange.
,if a cherub in the shape of woman
uld walk this world, yet defamation would,
e a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
-day the Baron started at-your tears.

Lady RANDOLPH.

did so, ANNA ! well thy Mistress knows,
the leait circuinfance, mote ofoffence,
ould touch the Baron's eye, his fight would be
th jealousy diforder'd. But the more
oes behove me instant to declare
e birth of DoUGLAs, and assert his rights.

This

This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the f-cret, and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mie.; his speech,
Were sweetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,,
Up rose the Hero: on his piercing eye
Sat Observation: on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Parfues the flash.

ANNA.

That demon haunts you still:
Behold GLEXALVOX.

Lady RANDOLPH,

Now I ihun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NoR VAL:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

Noble Dame !

The hov'ringDane at last his men hath landed:
No band of pirates; but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers;
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
But whence comes this intelligence, GLENALVON .O

GLENALVON.

A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,
To haflen up the chieftains of the north,
(iform'd me, as he pafl, that the fierce Dane
jad on the eaflern coast of Lothian landed,

sear to that place where the fea-rock immense,

amazing BaTs, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady RANDOLPH.

hen mull this weltern army march to join
he warlike troops that guard Edina's tow'rs.

GLENALVON.

eyond all queflion. If impairing time
as not effac'd the image of a.place,
nce perse& in my breaR, there is a wild
hich lies to westward of that mighty rock,
nd seems by nature formed for the camp
f water-wafted armies, whose chief flrength
ies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse
f martial skill direas the Danif lords,
here inaccefible their army lies
o our fwift-fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
uft man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady RANDOLPH.

ow many mothers ihall bewail their sons!
ow many widows weep-their husbands slain !
e dames ofDenmark! 'ev'n for you I feel,
ho sadly fitting on the fea-beat shore,
ong look for lords that never shall. return.

GLENALVON.

GLENALVON. - -

Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword
Widow'd the north. The children of the flaia
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monster war, with her infernal brood,:
Loud yelling'fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objets suited to GLENAL VON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death:
Reproach more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I scorn thee mot, but'when I ought to scorn;
Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
Againf audacious vice aferts herself.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON ; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty paflion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, glory.
Upon the Danili crefis redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield of RANDOLPH.

GLE.ALVON.

One inflant flay, and hear an alter'd man.
When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert ;time will ihew how truly;
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth, for whom your ardent zeal to-day
Somewhat too haughtily defy'd your slave,
Amidc' the shock of armies I'll defend,

. And

And turn death;from hi,,wilth a guardian arm. -
Sedate by use, my-bofonm maddens not
At the tumultubus uproar of the field.

Lady .RANDOLPH.

At thus, GLEN ALVoON, anid-Iam thy friend:
But that's-thy leat reward. Bieieve m'e;, Sir,
The truly'generotus is the truly wvifie; '
And he who'loves not others, lives unblefs.

. '

. [,Exit Lady RNDOLPH.

GLENALVON lo/ts.

Amen! and virtue is its own reward !-
I think that I have hit the very tone
In which the loves to speak. Honey'd assent,
I-owplcafant art thou to the taste of man,
And woman also !. flattery dire.t *."
Rarely difgufls. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not.'
Yet I incline to think her stormy virtue
Is lull'd a while: 'tis her alone 1 fear:
Whilit she and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head suspends disgrace and death,
By that weak hair, a peevish female's will.
I am'not idle': but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NoRv L'S I have found moit apt:

D I hew'd

I ihew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and fivear whatever I suggest.
NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are, like:Lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue
In railing RANDOLPr.'s jealousy I may
iBut point him to the truth. lIe seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

T9he End of the THIRD ACT

ACT

ACT IV.

Flourish of T'rumpets.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord RANDOLPH.
SUmmon an hundred horse, by break of day;

To wait our pleasure at the cattle-gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas! my Lord 1 I've heard unwelcome news; -
The Danes are landed.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent-to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,
And tain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
TheDanes are landed: we mult beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Dreadful times!
D Lord

Lord RANDOLPH.

The fenceless villages are all forsaken;
The trembling mothers; and their children lodg'd
In wall-girt towers and castles; whilRf the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Immense, as fame reports, the Danish host---

. Lord RANDOLPH.

Were it as numerous as loud fame reports;
An army knit like ours would pierce it thro':
Brothers, that ihrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companion, fill our. warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband; and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breatts heroic ardor burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady RANDOL-PH.

Men's minds are temper'd,.like their swords, for war;
Lovers of danger, on deftruftion's brink
They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; -hence,.the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant guet ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
Whose tlubbornnefs had foil'd the strength and ikill

Of

Of every rider. But behold hecomes,
In earnest conversation with GLENALVON.

Enter NORVAL and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON! with thelark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NoRvAL, thou goeft with me. But fay, young mari
Where didfl thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such terms as I o'erheard to-day ?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A larguage taught amongst the Ihepherd swains.

NORVAL.

Small is the ikill my Lord delights to praise
In him he favours.--- Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccessible by ihepherdstrod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Autlere and lonely, cruel to himifelf,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the thepherds' alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With rev'rence and with pity. Mild he spake,
And, entringon discourse, such stories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been. afoldier in his youth;

D 3, And

And fought in famous battles, when the Peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Against th' usurping Infidel difplay'd -
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man wou'd lhake
His years away, and act his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day 'discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf.
He cu: the figures of the marlhali'd holts;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm.,
For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's valf art, was to this hermit known.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Why did this soldier in a defart hide
'hose qualities that should have grac'd a camp?

- NORVAL.

That too at lad I learn'd. Unhappy man!
Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and bofi'rous captain of tht sea
Faifen'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought;
The lranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage ! Mighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh ! my brother!

Lady RANDOLPH.
His brother !

NORVAL.

NORVAL.

Yes; of the fame parents bor';

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness
And happy, in my mind, was he that died - .'
For many deaths has the survivor fufter'd,
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate,
At times, alas ! not in his perfec mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost;
And oft each night forsakes his fulled couch,
To make fad orifons.for him he flew.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To what mylterious woes -are mortals born
In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ? did the parents live ?

NORV AL.

No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clos'd their eyes
Before their son had shed his brother's blood.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame !
There is a destiny in this frange world,
Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Letfchoolmentell uswhy.-From whence these founds?

E[rumupets at a d/?ance.]
Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

My Lord, the. trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
The valiant leader hails the noble'RA N DOLPH.

D 4 Lord

Lord RANDOLPH.

Mine antient guest ! does he the warriors lead ?
Has-Denmark rous'd the brave old Knight to.arms?

OFF ICER.

No; worn with warfare; he resigns the fvord.
His eldefl hope, the valiant JOHN of LORN,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON, go.

With hospitality's moR flrong request
Intreat the chief.. [Exit GLENALVOJ,]

OFFICER.
My Lord, requests are vain;

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord RANDOLPH.

May vi&ory fit on the warrior's plume !
Bravest of men! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lie,
By mountains inacceflible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the antidnt world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain ;'
But fill f6r love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each strong antagonist the spear.
I'll go and press the heroto my breaf.

[Exit RANDOLPH'
..* .' ' .... tMait

Manent Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL, '-

'Lady RANDOLPH.

The soldier's loftiness, the pride and pomp
InveRling awful war, NORVAL, I fee,.
Transport thy youthful mind.

NORVAL.

Ah! ohould they not

Blef be'the hour I left my father's house !
I might have been a shepherd all my days,
And tole obscurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I fland;
And, if I fall, with noble dust I lie.

Lady RANDOLPH.

There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,
That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune;.
This way with me; under yon Spreading beechy,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,.
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale,

NORVAL.

Let there be danger, Lady, with the secret,,
ThatI may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life;:-
These are the sole poflefflons of poor NORVAL.'

Lady RANDOL H..
Know'it thou. there gems ?

NORVAL.

Durt I believe mine eyes,.
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

D 5, lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Thy father's, fay't thou ! ah ! they were thy father's!

NORVAL..

I saw them once, and curiously inquir'd
Of both my parents, whence such fpleildor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Then learn of me, thou art not NORVAL'S son.

NORVAL.
Not No R VAL'S son

Lady RANDOLPH.

Nor of a shepherd sprung.
NORVAL.
Lady, who am I then ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Noble thou art;
-For noble was thy Sire!

NORVAL.

I will believe-
! tell me farther!' Say who was my father

Lady RANDOLPH.
DOUG-LAS!'

NORVAL.
Lord DOUGLAS, whom to day I saw ?'

Lady RAN DOLPH.
His younger brother.

NORVAL.
And in yonder camp ?

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Alas !

NORVAL.

You make me tremble- Sighs and tears!:
Lives my brave father ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Ah ! too brave indeed!:
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

NORVAL.

Ah me unhappy ! ere I saw the light?
But does my motherlive ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady RANDOLPH.

She lives; but wafies her life in constant woe,
Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

NORVAL..

You that are fkill'd so well in the fad fory
Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their destiny, now have compaflion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd !

! tell me who, and where my mother is !

Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps she bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of heav'n' the aid
Her son hould give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confesses that she's wretched.

! tell me her condition ! Can the sword--
WhJo lhall refilt me in a parent's cause ?

|D 6- Dady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy virtue'ends her woe.- My son, my son i
I am thy mother, and the wife of DOUGL.AS

[Falls upon his fil e

NORVAL.

O heav'n,and earth, how wondrous is my fat!e
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel !

Lady RANDOLPH.

Image of DOUGLAS !. Fruit of fatal love !
All that I owe thy Sire, I pay to thee.

NOR VAL.

Refpese and admiration still possess me,
Checking the love and fondness of a fora
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my Sire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Arise, my son! In me thou dost behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd -
The autumn of my days is come already;.
For sorrow made my summer haste away.
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he wonw
All hearts with softness,. or with spirit aw'd.

NORVAL.

How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloody field
'When Do GLAs died. 0 1 have much to arlk!

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Hereafter thou (halt hear the lengthen'd tale
Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes,
At present this: thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder catle, and thewide domains
Which now Lord RAANDOLPH, as my husband, holds,
But thou (halt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee frill: before the King I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to protet his blood.

NORVAL.
The blood of DOUGLAS will protea itself.

Lady RANDOLPH,

But we ihall need both friends and favour, boy..
To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

NOR AL.

To be the son of DoUGLAs is to me
Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady RAN DOLPH.

Thou dost not know what perils and injustice
Await the poor man's valour. 0 1 my son!
The noblest blood of all the land's abafh'd;
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.'
Too long haft thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS !
Too long hall thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief

La Perhaps

Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports :
Whilst thy indignant spirit fvell'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more flalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return..
Retire, and from thy ruffic-follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated before
This casual opportunity arose
Ofprivate conference. Its'purportmar;-
For, as I there appoint, we meet again.
Leave me, my son ! and frame thy manners still
To NORVAL'S, not to noble DOUGLAS' Rate.

- NORVAL..

I will remember. Where is NORVAL now
That good old man.

Lady RANDOLPH.

At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENA.LVON ; in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's shrewdness, ever prone
To false conjeture. He hath griev'd my heart.·

NORVAL.

Has he indeed ? Then.let yon false GLENALVONa
Beware of me.

pExit DOUGLAS,

-l anet

Manet Lady RANDOLPH,

There burit the fmother'd flame!

0! thou all righteous and eternal King!
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Prote& my son ' - Thy inspiration, Lord!
Hath fill'd his bosom wih that sacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd:-
Set him on high like them, that he may mhine
The flar and glory of his native land!
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing spirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpeas to conceal their guilt
When I, by reason, and by jufRice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious caufi.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALV.ON.

Lord RANDOLPH..

Yon gallant chief;.
Of arms enamour'd, all repose difdaims.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange the business of to-morrow now,.
And, when you enter, speak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

Manent

*Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVO0

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis so, .by heavn ! her mien, her voice, her eye,.
And her impatience to begone, confirm it,

GLEN ALVON.-

He parted from her now: behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord RANDOLPH.
For fad, fequefter'd virtue the's renowned !

GLENALVON.-
Most true, my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yet this diftinguifh'd Dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This afignation, [.e.os a letter . the assassin freed,
Her manifelt aftieion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded;
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,.
Whose heart he knows he has not ; th' the brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry,
For let her seem, like the night's shadowy queens..,
Cold and contemplative ;-He cannot trust her:
She may, she will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
The worlt of sorrows, and the worst of shames !

GLS.

GLENALVON.

Yield not, my Lord, to such affliaing thoughts;
But let the spirit of an- husband sleep;
Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet mull to blooming No RVAL' go:

t the next turn awaits my truity spy;
I'11 give it him refitted for his mailer.
n the close thicket take your secret stand;
he moon shines bright, and your owh eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thou doll counsel well.
CiLBNALVON.

Permit me now to make o'ne flight eflay.
Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The firit and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fimes intoxicates the mind ! '
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord RANDOLPH.
And what avails this maxim

GLENALVON.

Much, my Lord !

Withdraw a little: I'll accost young No RVAL,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd,

Brave

Brave as he is, he'll shrink aftonifh'd from me:
But if he be the fa'rite of the fair,
Lov'd by the i.rn of Caledonia's dames, .
He'll turn upon me, as thelion turns .
Upon the hunter's ipear.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis ihrewdly thought.

GLENALVON.

When we grow loud, draw near. But let my Lord
His rising wrath reltrain. [Exit RANDOLPH

Manet GLENALVON.

'Tis firange, by heav'n!

That she should run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter stream, when ice embofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaile,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !
Whose deeds lafciviouspafs GLENALVON'S thought

NORVAL appeari,

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has NORVAL seen the troops ?

NORVAL.

The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale, .

,

And as the warriors mov'd, each polilh'd helm, .
Corllet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.;
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,

Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd,
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

GLENALVON.

Thou talk'ft it well; no leader of our host,
In founds more lofty, speaks of glorious war.

NORVAL.

If I (hall e'er acquire a leader's name,
My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itfelffreely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertaining to the great in arms.

GLENALVON.

You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial deeds.
Haverank'd youwith thegreat: butmark me,NoRvAL;
Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know the soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command:
Else thy will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

NORVAL.

Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days
To hear and speak the plain and imple truth:
And tho' I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow friendfiip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fkill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counsel,
Altho' it founded harlhly. Why remind

Me

Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?

GLENALVOX.

I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

NOBVA L.
My pride

GLENALVON.

Suppress it as you wish to prosper.

Yourpride's exceii've. Yet for RANDOLPHS falke
I will not leave you to its raih dire&ion.
If thus you ftLvcli a.d frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a (hephcrd's scorn

NORVAL.
A shepherd's scorn !

GLENALVON.

Yes, if you presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
What will become of you ?

NOP.VAL.

If this were told- [Aside
Hafi thou no fears for thy presumptuous self?

GLENALVON.
-a ! Dost thou threaten me ?

NORVAL.

DidfC thou not hear ?

GLENALVON.

Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been quefRion'd thus. But such as-thee-

NORVAL,

NORVAL.
WWhoni doff thou think me?

GLENALVON.

g Nor-val.
NORVAL.

So I am -
!nd who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes ?

GLENALVON.

A peasant's son, a wand'ring beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

NORVAL.
alfe as thou art, dost thou fufpeEt my truth ?

GLENALVON.

hy truth ! thou'rt all a lie; and false as hell
sthe vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to RANDOLPH.

NORVAL.

f I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bedrid old,
Perhaps I should revile: But as I am
I have no tongue rail. The humble NORVA,
s of a race who strive not but with deeds.
id I not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
'd tell thee-what thou art. I know thee well.

GLENALVON.

DoR thou not know GL ENALVON, born to command
Ten thouland slaves like thee ?

NORVAL.

yillain, no more:
Draw and defend thy life. I did design

To

To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and ,ady RANDoLPH's wrongs, I

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLP.H.

Hold, I command you both. The man thatffirs.
Makes me his foe.

NORVAL.

Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH..

GLENALVON,

Hear him, my Lord; he's wondrous condescending!
Mark the humility of shepherd NORVAL !

NORVAL.
Now you may scoff in safety. [Sheaths hissrd,

Lord RANDOLPH.

Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

NORVAL.

Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you much,
My cause I plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blush to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne,
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjet's homage; but even him
And his high arbitration I'd reject.

*Wit.in

ithin my bosom reigns another lord;
onour, sole judge and umpire of itself.
f my free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
evoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
ence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

Lord RANDOLPH.

hus far I'll mediate with impartial voice:
he antient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
ufpendyour purpose, till your country's arms
epel the bold invader; then decide
The private quarrel.

GLENALVON.

I agree to this.

NORVAL.
And .I

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.
The banquet waits.

Lord RANDOLPH.

We come;

[Exit RANDOLPH:
GLENALVON.

Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH -

1| Nor

Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkl'd hate,
Shall tain my countenance. Smooth thor, thy brow;
Nor let our fitrife disturb the gentle Dame.

NORYAL. -

Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment;
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

7:e Eni of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT

A CT V.

The Wood.-

Enter DOUGLAS.

HIS is the place, the centre of the grove.
Here sands the oak, the monarch of the wood.

How sweet and solemn is this mid-night scene !
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little star.
The fanning weft wind scarcely stirs the leaves;
The river, ruflhing o'er its pebbled bed,
nmpofes silence with a stilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If anceltry can be in ought believ'd,
Descending spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.

NORVAL.

Tis he. But what if he ihould chide me hence;
His juR reproach I fear.

[Douc LA s turn s antiees him.
Forgive, forgive,

1. - Canst

Cans thou forgive the man, the felfilh man,
Who bred Sir MALeCOL m'S heir a shepherd's son,

DOUGLAS.

Kneel not to me: thou art my father till:
Thy wilh'd-for presence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me, my fortunes thou shalt lhare,,
And ever honour'd with thy DOUGLAs live.

Old NORVAL.

And dost thou call me father ? O my son I
I thihk that I could die to mhke aniiids
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Tias my crime
Which in the w;ilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of dhy youth.

DOUGLAS.

Not worse the fruit,

That in the wildernes 'the blossom blow'd.
Amongit the liepherds, in the humble cote,
I learn'd some lessons, which Ill not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once, a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
NORVAL ihall smooth the crefted'prideof DoUGLAS

NORVAL.

Let me but live to fee thine'exaltation!
Yet grievous are my fears. 0 leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

DOUGLAS.

Why 1hould I leave thei

.NORVMI

NORVAL.
Lord RANPOLPH and his kinsman seek your life.

DOUGLAS. '
How know'fl thou that?

NORVAL.

I will inform you how.

When evening came,- -left thei-fecret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod-in-each-accuftom'd path
That to the castle leads, -WhiIft thus -rang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpeted founds
Of earnest voices. On the.peifons came;
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd,Lord RA N DOLPH this,
And that GLENALVON : flill-of you they. spoke,
And of the Lady; threat'ningwas their'fpeech,
Tho' but inpefeetly'my- ear could-hear-it. -
'Twas strange, they;faid,: a wonderful-difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

DOUGLAS.
Revenge! for what ?

.NORVAL:

For being what you-are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you.offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage, -
And there fat musing how I beRl might find
Means to inform you of-their wicked purpose.
Bat I could think :of none :. at laftlperplex'd
I ilhed forth, encompafling the .ower ,

E 3 With

With many a weary itep and wishful look. _
Now Providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too couragious spirit scorn
The caution which I give..

DOUGLAS.

I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd meof GLENALVON'S baenefsi
But I will not fufpe& the noble RANDOLPH..
In our encounter with the vile assassins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trust.

NO RVAL.
I fear you will too far.

DOUGLAS.

Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: Ihe ihall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow:
And cautions ever are a mother's counsels.
You must depart; your presence may -prevent
Our interview.

NORVAL.

My blefling reit upon thee!

0 may heav'n's hand, which fav'd.thee frorm thewav
And from the sword of foes, be near thee fill;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,:
All upon mine !

[Exit Old NORVA

DOUGLAS.

He loves me like a,parent;
And must not, ihall not lose the son he loves,

Itho' his son has found a nobler father.
ventful day ! how haft thou chang'd my fate !
nce on the cold, and winter shaded iide
f a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
ever to thrive, child of another foil.
ranfplanted now to the gay funny vale,
ike the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
e glorious fiars ! high heav'n's resplendent hi6 ' '
o whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
ear and record my foul's unalter'd wilh! .
ead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
ay heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
o give a bold defiance to our hot / -
efore he speaks it out I will accept;
ikeDouGLas conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH..

Lady RANDOLPH,
y son! I heard a voice-

DOUGLAS.

-The voice was mine.

Lady RANDOLPH.

idft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,
'hat thus in dulky shades, at midnight-hours,
Ry Realth the mother and the son Ihould meet ?

[Emiriicing him.

DOUGLAS.

o; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

E 3 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Sad fear and melancholy fill divide
The empire of my bread with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

DOUGLAS.

Firfl, let me tell
What may the tenor of your. counsel change.

Lady RANDOLPHI
My heart forebodes some evil!

DOUGLAS,

'Tis not good.--

At eve, unfeenby RANDOL'PH and GLENALVOS,
The good old NOR VAL in the-grove b'erheard4
Their conversation-: oft they meition'd:men.
With dreadful threatnings; ypu theyobmethnesnam'd,'
'Twas itrange, they said, a wonderful diteovry.; ....
And ever and anon theyvtwudreenge;

Lady RANDOL'P.H;. . ..

Defend us, gracious God::. weare betray'd:
They. have f6und out te- secret of thy birth;
It muff be so. That is-thegreat discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come tO claim his:own;
And he wilt be reveng'd' Perhaps-even'now, .
Arm'd and'prepar'd' fr murder, they but'wait
A darkerand'more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they. think thou fleep'fl.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd'to save thieel
Fly to the canp, my son!

DoUGLAS.

DOUGLAS.

And leave.you here?

o: to the cafle let usgo togethers
all up the antient servants of your housfe
ho in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell.them loudly that I am your son.
f in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
ome in your cause wll arm. I alk but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's.houfe.

Lady RANDOLPH.

O Nature, Nature! what can check thy force ?
ghou gehuine offspring of the daring DOUGL,AS r
But rush not on detruftion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm!
Thy y but riiks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conduts thee to the iver.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Ifnlant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS.
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Wh ich I by certain proof-will soon confirm.

DOUGLAS.

I yield me and obey,: but yet my heart
Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me flay
And guarda mother's life. Oft-have I read.
Of wondrous deeds by one. bold.arm atchiev'd.
Cur foes are two : no more: let me go.forth,
And fee ifany Ihield can guard. G.LENALvYON

JJ E A4, L yad

Lady RANDOLPH.

If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft . ;
Thy father's mem'ry,. think of this no more.
One thing I have to fay before we part;
Long wert thou loft; :and thou art found, my child,;
In a most fearful season; War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
Today Ihave found thee. Oh-! my long los hopei
If thou to giddy valour giv'lt the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee, before thou faw'ft the light,
Suftain'd my life when thy brave father fell.'
If thou shalt fall, I have nor love nor hope.
In this wafe world I my son, remember me !-

DOUGLAS.

What Ihall I fay ? how can I give you comfort
The God of battles ofmy life dispose
As may be befl for you! for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim ?
The poll of fate unfhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes muff witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine strain. :
If in this strife I fall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives-not honour'd, must not live.

-*,."*': ;~
. T' adv

Lady RANDOLPH.

' I will not utter what my bosom feels.
Too well I love that valour which I warn,
Farewell, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

[Embracg.
And as highheav'nhath will'd.it all murtbe. [Separate,

Lady RANDOLPH.

Gaze not on me, thou wilt miifake the path;
I'll point it out again,

[.7ug as they are/eparating, inter from the 'woo

Lord RANDOLPX and GLENALVON.]

Lord RANDOLPH.

Not in her presence.
Now-

GLENALVON,

I'm prepar'd.
Lord RANDOLPH.

No: I command itee fay.

I go alone: it never half be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the moit compleat.

[xit Lord RANDOLPH,

[GLENALVO nmakesfome feps to the fame Jid
of theflage, lif ens andfpeaksr

GLENALVON.

Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home!
Th 'lover and the husband both mult die. .

- be rat i

*fordsRANDUTFHB. -:: IL.
Draw, .villaiw !' draw;

DOUGLAS.
Assail me-not,Lord RANDOLRH;
Not as thou lov'Ii tiyfeW.

[ClaFing ofJfords,

[GLENA AvoN running out.l
Now is the time.
»nter Lady RA.NDOPHF at the oppofitefide of tth

fiage, faint' and breathlefsJ

Lady RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH, hear me; all fall be thine own:
But spare! Oh spare my son I

Enter DOUGLAs with a sword in each hand;

My mother's voice
X can protea thee flilL

Lady RANDOLPH .

He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise !I
But sure I saw thee fallk

DOUGLAS.
It was GLEFNALVON.

Just as my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S fwordj;.
The villain came behind me; but I flei him.

Lady

Lady RANK.oPH.

Behind thee! AhJ, tbho.'rt:wswndidO .. mXchild;».
How pale thou liok'ft andlfall .f
thal Qov. ,,

DOUCLAS.

Do not despair: I feel a little.faintnefs ;;
I hope it will:not lafi.

[Leses upon hisiswrid.]
- Lady D'ANDOLP'.

. There.is no hope l

And wemult part the hand of death is on thee !'
O my beloved chil,!. O. DOUqGLAS, BOUC.LAS- :

DOUGLAS.

Too soon we part; I have not long been DOUGL AS.
0 destiny! hardly thou deal'ft witti me,:.
Clouded and hid,. a flranger to myself,.
In low and poor o bcurity I liv'd.

Lady.,RA4iD,aLP;
Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an.end likeithis ?

DOUGLAS. -

O had 1 fallen as my brave fathers fellI
Turning with great effort the-tide of battle!'
Like them I should have fmil'd.and welcom'd. deathi.
But thus to perifti by a villain's hand.!
Cut off from nature's and from glory's courfei.
Which. never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady.RANDOLPH.
lHearjuftice ! hear! ltretch thy aengig arlt,.

[DoUGLAS fIll. J
E. 6. DOUGLtAS

- DOUGLAs;

Unknown I die' -no tongue lhall'fpeak 6f me._-,
Some noble fpiits, judging by themselves, -
May yet conjeature what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to: my fame:
But wha'hall comfort thee ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

; Despair! despair!

DOUGLAS.

O had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live '
A litdle while !-my eyes that gaze on thee ':
Grow dim apace! my mother-O ! my mother!:.

:*- E'[DiN,]
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA,

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy words, the words of truth, havepierc'd my heart.
I am the stain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh! if my brave deliverer survives .
The traitor's ivord-

ANNA.

Alas! look there, my Lord;

Lord RANnoLPH.

The mother and her son 1 How curi I am!.
Was I the cause? No: I.was not the cause.
Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy'

» ó1NNAI

ANNA.
My Lady'lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreift
A while her powers.

Lord RANDOLPH.

But my'deliverer's dead !

The world did once efleem Lord RANDOLPH well
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now.paf the noon of life, shame comes upon me;,
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
ThatRANDOLPH hafely ftab'dSirMALCOLM'S heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH recovering.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Where am I now ? fill in this wretched world!
Grief cannot break a heart To hardas mine.
My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's frengtbh
With hope's afifRance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the objea now, "
On which Omnipotence diiplays itself,
Making a fpeaacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vassal, man.

Lord RANDOLP. ,

0 misery

AmidA thy raging grief Imuft proclaim
My inniacence.

Lady

- Lady R-ANDOLPH.

ry.rinrocen1e.! -
-EorRANpDoQzxtiH. * , . . r

,M, gimt :
Is innocence compar'd: with what thpouthink'if it; -

Lady, RANDOLPH.

Of theeI thinl nt.: what have I tp.oi . - ..
With thee or.any. thing? My.fo., myfon !
My beautiful! my brave! how pro.d-was I
Of thee, and ofthy valour ! My fond' heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport,. when I thouglt.:
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,.
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,.
And bear my brothers and my. hulband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead I A little while
Was I a wife! a mother not so long.!
What am I now ?--I know.--But I ihall be
That only whilt I please ; for such a son
And such a husband make a wooman bold. [Run otu

'Lord RANDOLPg.

Follow her, ANN.A, I myfelfwo,uld follov,
But in this rage the mut.ab hor- my presence

Ewit A.gA
Enter Old NORVA,. .. ·

NORVAL.
I hear the voice of woe; heave, guard my cfiilil!.

Lord RiNMDO H'u.

Already is the idlegaping:crowdl:
The spiteful vulgar come to gage O -RANDOLPHIt.
Begone. :

NOmVAL.

I fear theenot. I will nt go..

Here I'll remain. I'm, an, accompice, Loird .
With thee in murder .. Yes, my fins did help-
To cruft down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 nobleR youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetet and belt, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world I Wretch that I am,
,Who saw that noble fpint swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it r
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
Which, timely known, had rais'd the.e far above
The villain's snare ' Oh I I am punih'd now!
These are the hairs that lould have fr.ew'd the ground,
And notthelocks ofDouG LAS.

[Tears his hair, and throws himself

upon the body of DOUGLAS.

Lord R:ANDOO LPH.

know thee now: thy boldness I forgive;
My crest is fallen. For thee I'will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee reft.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punifi.
Curst, curst GLBNAL.V ON, he efcap'd too welt,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.

E- aming

Foaming with rage and fury to the las,
Curmng his conqueror, the felon died.

Enter A N N A

ANNA. -
My Lord'! my Lord!

Lord RANDOLPH;'

Speak: I can hear ofhornor
ANNA. - - .. '
Horror indeed !

Lord RANDOLF.
MATILDA ?

.ANNA.

Is no more; .

She ran, she flew like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice Ihe gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither the came, -
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down.---

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Twas I! alas! 'twas I

'That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The precipice of death! Wretch that I am r

ANNA.

0 had you seen her lass despairing look
Upon the brink Ihe Rood, and car her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands-to-hcaven, seeming to fay,,

'Bthy

Why am I forc'd to this ? ihe plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord RANDOLPH -

I will not vent,

In vaincomplaints, the paflion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside must threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With colt and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never fall return. _
I

iF I N I S.

EPI-

# EPILOGUE.

E P I L 0 G- U-E

NN Epilogue IaJk'd; hut not one word
Our bard'will write. He, vows, 'tis mqf# afirit

W'ith comic wit to contradiót the jfraii
Of tragedy, and makeaour sorro.ws wvail;
Sadly he ay,, that pity is thec hi,
The noblejl pa/ on of the human brea/ :
For when its.faedretjitea? theheart o'erfflw,
In gujhes plecfrre. cwitb thbetide. of we; ..
.nd when its'waves retire, Jik thol of file,
hey leave behind themfuch a golden foil,
That there.the virtues 'without culture grow,
There thefweet bloomms of aifeon blow.
These 'were his words :--void of delusi.ve art
Ifelt them; for he loke themfrorm.his heart.
Nor w Oill I now attempt, with 'witty follj,
To chafe away celeofial melancholy.

A G I S:

A
T R A G E D

As it is A C T B D at the
THEATRE-ROYAL

IN
DRURY-LAN E.

# PROLOGUE, Written by  Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.

p R O L .0 G U E,

'Written by--

Spoken by Mr. G'AR R I C K,

F in the/e days ofluxury and ease,
tAtalefrom Sparta's rigidflate can please;

If atriot plans a Britilh breaf can warm ;
f Kings aferting liberty can charm;
If virtue Jill a grateful afpeat wear;
Check not at Acis'fall the gen'rous tear.

He vietw'd his fibjeTes with a parent's love;
Wlith zeal tofave afrnking people flrove;
St)rve their chang'd hearts with glory to inflame;
To mend their morals; and reflore their name;
Tillfalion rose with murder at herfide ; *
Then mnorn'd his country; per/ever'd; and died.

That country oncefor virtue was rever'd;
Admir'd ly Greece; by haughty Afafear'd.
ihen citizens and /ildiers iwere theJfame; .
Ardifoldiers heroes' for their wealth was fame.
hen for the Brave the Fair refrerv'd her charms;
And forn'd to clasp a coward in her arms.
The trunpet call'd; ]hefeiz'd the sword andjhield;
Array'd in hafe her hufiandfor the field;
And/ghing whifser'd in asond embrace,
" Renmember !- death is better than disgrace."
The 'widow'd mother hew'd her partingfon
T'fe rae of glory which his fire had run..
" yfin, thy flight alone Ihall deplore.
' Return 'victorious !-or return no more !"

iWhike

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

While -eauty thus with patriot zeal comin'd,

And round the laurel'Phiead her' iyrtle twin'd;
Whilf all confeji the Virtuous 'were the Great.;
Fdme, 'Vlour; Coniuefl, gracd the Spartanfla/e.
Her Pow'r congenial with her Virtue grew,
AndFreedom's banner o'er her Phalanx Jtew;
But soon as Virtue dropt hers icking head,
Fame, Valour, Conquefi, Pou'r anidFreedon.eied.

May this.fadifcene improve tach'Briton's heart!

.Rozfe him uwith 'warmth to a' a Briton' part !
Prompt him with Sparta's"noblefl sos to 'vie;
To live inglory ; and infireedom die!

D R AMATI'S P E'RS, NA,

AGIS, King of Sparta,; Mr. MossoP,

LYSA NDER, 2 S7 Mr. GARIt1;
AMPHARES, 5 Spartans. Mr. HAviAS,

RHESUS,? ., . * .". Mr.Ho i/,.i,
REuusS, ' Thracians. Mr. HDAvor
EuxU s, 3 Mr. DAVIEs

WO M EN.

AGES I STRAT A MotherofAGlsMrs.;PRITCHA RD
SANDANEQUeentoLEONlDASMrs Y ES

the exil'd King, .5

ETANTHE, an Atheniah Lady, -Mrs. CIBBER..
Senators, Ephori, Messengers.

# AGIS: A TRAGEDY.

A G I S-:

A
T R A-G E D Y.

A C T I.
A court and hall, common. to the palaces of

the kings of S P A RT A,

Enter SANDANE attended.
T A S T E N, ORONTES, to the fedate-houfe,

And iearn if rumor's voice has spoke the trith.

[Exit Atteldant.

The adverse fortune of an exil'd king
Purfuesmy lord. AgHAIA's'generous aid
Sutains his cause in vain. Why risk a battle,
When the continuance of defensive war
Secur'd success and viaory in Sparta ?
Would I had never left thy fpIendid court,
Delightful SARDIS ! to be Sparta's queen.

Enter AMPHAR-ES.
Welcome, AMPnHARES ! Have the armies met'?

AM.

AMPHARES.'

They-have. This morning, at the break of day,
The Spartan army charg'd ACHAIA'S hoRt.
This and-no more is known. Suspense and fear
Poffels the people; to the gates they run,
Then to their houses.: The Rill whisper spreads
Thro' jufling multitudes the dread alarm.

SANDA NE.

Alas ! revenge and empire now depend
On the wild issue of unruly war.
What if the arms of AGIs Ihould prevail ?

* AMPHARES.

Although he should, the toils of. fate surround him,
Dauntless and firm our brave associates stand,
And with impatience wait the deftin'd hour
To rulh on AGIS. This unlook'd for battle
Is but a solemn prelude to the at,
Which bold conspiracy will soon perform.
This day shall terminate the reign of AGIs,
And make, O Queen ! all power in Sparta thine.

SANDANE.

I fee that danger only whets the brave.
But yet, AMPHARES, ifmy lord is vanquifh'd,
Will not theconquering army awe the city ?

AMPHARES.

AGIs ihall be the surety of our cause,
And hostage for our safety, till we wrest
The sword from proud LYs A ND ER, if he conquers;
But that I fear not much. New to command

From

From idle Athens the mock herb comes,
Starts up a soldier, and a itatefman too;
Each palm he claims: All honours mult adorn
The chosen friend of visionary AG I s.

SANDANE.

May Mars dire& him so to guide the war,
AsAcs rules the fate: And mutiny
Prove there as fatal as sedition here.

AMPHARES.

This factious tfate must change lts feeble.form,
Waver no more beneath a double reign
Oflimited, contending, useless kings.
Henceforth one monarch lhall in Sparta rule,
AsJOVE alonein high OL-MPUS reigns.

SANDANE.

So reign the mighty monarchs of the East;
And fich imperial power, I thought, belong'd
To Sparta's king, else I had ne'er been queen.
ioung, and deceiv'd, I left my father's court
or Lacedemon's miserable sceptre.
did endeavour to extend its sway,
nd to ambition rous'd my Spartan lord.
ut the vain pupil of the Grecian schools,
nprincely AcI, marr'd the brave design.
hiefof the multitude, idol and slave
f the bate populace, he led the herd,
urg'd their brutal fury on the king.

AMPHARES.
~nd now their fury on himself recoils.

F Like

Like the unruly elephant, they turn,
And trample down the ranks in which they fought.

SaNDANE.\
That is their Liberty.

AMPHARES.

Let us employ,

And then suppress, such formidable licence.
My magifiracy now is near expir'd;
A king's resentment and a rival's hate.
Have long hung over my devoted head:
Farewel to place, to dignity, and power,
WhilRl haughty AGIS fills the Spartan throne.
I will not live obscure in Lacedemon,
Nor roam thro' Grecian flates a banilh'd man.
If I muff set, to rife and shine no more,
A fiery track flall mark my setting fun.
But AGIS comes.

SANDANE.
And ACESTSTRATA.

Farewel Success attend thee, brave-AMPHARES!
I will not flay. My foul disdains to hide
Its hatred or its scorn. [Exit SANDANI

iAMPHARES.

Yet they who mean

To gratify these paflions, must conceal them.
This day decides my fate. So let it be,
Such briefconclufion have I ever lov'd.
Ailift me, Hermes, God offtratagems,
With artful words, to sooth the mind of AGIs,
And turn him from the track mypurpofe holds.

&re

Enter AGIs aid AGESISTRATA.

AGESISTRATA.
Alas! my son ! that bold bad man I dread !

AGIs.

Hefeemsto wait us. Atthishour, AMPHARES,
I think that thou of all men fhiould'ft have shunn'd me.

AMPHARES.

My motive in attending here your presence
Merits a less injurious salutation.

AGIS.

I know thy merits, and I will reward them.
Art thou not author of the woes of Sparta,
Prime mover and inflamer of sedition
Haft thou not bent the power of thy high office
To the subversion of the date thou ferv'f ?
At thee this day my indignation burns.
I am difhonour'd- -

AMPHARES.
What has dilhonour'd thee ?

Acis.

Thou and thy pratices: They have compell'd me
To leave the noblest fiation of a prince.
In time of war where should a king be found
But at his army's head ? There AGIS stood,
When you and your presumptuous Ephori
Requir'd my presence here. Ungrateful Spartans !
Had you allow'd me but one other day,

F 2 Thea

Then had I fought this battle for my country,
And died or conquer'd with her bravest sons.

AGESISTRATA.

Peril, my son ! dwells not in camps alone: t
In cities, palaces, and courts ofjuftice,
With treachery and treason he. inhabits.
Peril attended thus thou must encounter,
More hideous sure than in the ranks of war.

AMPHARES.

I know my actions have incens'd the king.
But Iimagin'd not that such suspicions
Found entertainment in your royal breafis.

AGIS. .

Haft thou not join'd the enemies of AG s ?
Thou who waft once his friend, inconstant man.

AMPHARES.

I have oppos'd the counsel of a foe;
Whose arts depriv'd me of my prince's favour.

AGIS.

Thou haft oppos'd LYCURGUS and the laws,
Which rais'd the name of Sparta to the ikies.
The Delphic God infpir'd the deep design:
For more than human was that power of thought
Which join'd the public to the private good,
With such perfection, that each selfish passion
Flow'd in the channel of the common welfare,
And, like one family of sons and fires,
And dearef brothers, a great people liv'd;
In peace they liv'd without or' rife or scorn,

p .d, In

In war they fought to conquer, or to die.
Equaland free, our happy fathers knew
No interef but the interest of the state;
No gain but Sparta's glory; proud they bore
That palm aloft, and shar'd the high refpe&,
The admiration, which consenting Greece
Paid to th' imperial virtue of their country.

AMPHARES.

Revolving time that system overthrew,
And chang'd the manners and the laws. of Sparta.

AGIs.

Tile laws have been neglected, not annull'd,
And cdrrupt rulers have corrupted manners.
Authority will loon revive the laws,
And great example yet restore the manners,
Infpite ofthofe who have opprefs'd their country,
Depriv'd the people of their antient rights, -
And, while the nation funk beneath their sway,
Still drove for power in a declining kingdom,.
Still fought for wealth in an impoverifh'd land.
Even at this hour rapacious they persist,
And, like some wretches in a stranded veflel,
Plunder and riot in the midst of ruin.

AMPHARES.

Mov'd by the present perils of the state,
This signal hour I chore, unknown as yet
The fortune of the field, to change my condut,
And make an offer of my aid to Ac I s.

F 3 . AcGs.

Acts.

If I hould judge the future by the padt,
Thou mutl'forgive me, tho' I doubt thy faith..

AGESISTRATA.

Yet hear him, Agis: in an hour like this
* He who a'flitance offers is a friend.

AGIS.

This hour may yet deceive their country's foes.
I know the base foundation of that hope
Which makes my baffled enemies presume.
LYSAsDER'S army in its rankscontains
The best and bravest of Laconia's sons;
The fa&cion wish and hope defeat to them,
That Sparta's generousyouth may ne'er return
To guard that freedom which has made them brawe

AMPHARES.

The boldness of their hopes their deeds will prove
In the aflembly, if.Achaia conquer.

AGESISTR &TA.
AMPHARES,. fay, what is their utmost aim?-

AMPHARE S.

The old dependants of the exil'd king,
And all the venal members of the itate,
Won by SANDANE'S arts and foreign gold,
Aim to reflore LEONIDAS, who comes
With hostile armies to'enflave his country:
Therefore SANDA N E'S proffers I rejeced,
Have warn'd the king, and would have serv'd hiimtco
. But since refeintment and distrust prevent me, a

Neutral I stand; and will not seek that welcome
Which his more artful enemies'would give.

AGIs.

Thoufpeak'lt more boldly than becomes AMPHAR ES.
Add that to the offences I forgive.
It is the sacred maxim of my reign,
That in a prince's consecrated breast
Revenge and anger ihould not long remain.
There passions in a king afflia the state,
By driving ra(h offenders to despair.
This day decides your character with me.
Now let your ations prove your words sincere.

AMPHARES. -

No other terms I afr, and fare I am
Ne'er Ihall AMPHARES need again forgiveness.

[Exit AMPHARES.
Manent AGIS and AGESISTRATA,

Ac 15.

Well has he judg'd the season offubmiffion.
He willafliftus if LYSA DER conquers.

AGESISTRATA.A

May Jove avert the evils which I fear I
Idread the ruin of the Spartan fate,
And fear the downfal of our antient house.
The blacket fury of the Stygian realm,
The most deftruLtive, is infernal Discord.
Bath'd in the blood of kings she walks this world,
And tumbles states and empires to the ground.

F 4 Acic.

Ac s.

Nations oft perifi by their princes crime;
But now if Sparta's antient iate must fall,
Gods and good men 'hail witness for its king,
That he with fate contended for his people,
And on the ruins of their virtue fell.

AGESISTRATA.

Think not I mean to blame your high design,
Age has not chang'd the tenor of my mind,
Nor pali'd my admiration of true glory.
Sprung, like thy father, from Alcides' blood,
I feel the spirit of the Spartan line.
Only let me adjure thee to beware
And walk with caution thro' surrounding perils.
Tho' thou despisers every form of danger,
Think what a helpless train attends on thee,
An aged mother, and an infant son.

AGIS.
Divine Alcides will protect his iace.

AGESISTRATA.

I will invoke the God; in times like there
Prayers are the arms of our defenceless sex.
A fpotefs choir of matrons and of virgins,
Who o'er their country mourn, myfelfwill lead
To the high temple of the ton of Jove.
He yet may hear the voice of supplication,
And stretch his arm to save the Spartan tlate.

[Exit AGESISTRATA,

AGIS,

AGIS alone.

Without, the enemy; within, the facion.
What Ihou'd I think ? I have a thousand thoughts
That rife and fall like waves upon the Shore.
I need thee now, LYSANDER ! O my friend !
I lean on thee, and thou perhaps art fall'n.
Ye ever-living Gods, who know my heart,
I trult in you, for righteous are niy thoughts,
All bent on raising up long-proftrate Sparta.
With Sparta too, I would be proud to rife,
And gain such glory as my fathers gain'd,
When Persia's tyrant trembled at their arms.
If in this just ambition I should perifih,
My name Ihall go to nations yet unborn.
But I mult change my firain: EU A N TH E comes.
Alas! LYSANDER, led by love and- thee,
She left her Athens for this land of broils.

Enter EUANTHE.

EUANTHE.
No tidings from the camp ?

AcGs,

None, fair EUANTHE..

If we had loll the field, the flying rout
Ere this had reach'd our gates.

EUANTHE.

Oh! many a dame,
Matron and virgin, tremble at this hour;

F 5 Bat

But who has cause like mine ? The moll forlorn
And desolate of women is$EUA NTHE! .
If- . ,.

. . AGIS.

Small the chance of what EUANTHE fean

In the long wvars of Rill-contending Greece .
Leaders of armies have but rarely fallen.

EUANTHE. , '

One thing I know, and with prophetic tongue
I speak it, Prince! if Sparta triumph not,
Ne'er shall your eyes again behold LYSANDER.:
Disdain in him is fatal as despair.

AGIs.

When he returns viAorious from the field,
Then aiall he hear who bell has spoke his praise;
But 1 mufl leave you now: The senate waits me.
Hereafter we lhall speak of this, and smile
Like mariners who on the peaceful shore
Sit, and with pleasure talk of tempefis past.

- Etc[Exii Aos,

EUANTHE alone.

This lfedfall ease is all affum'd, I fee; .
He flaggers at the imminent event.
How dreadful is this interval to me,
Who am bereft and defiitute of all
Those aids that flay afflicion; and mull bear
lThe weight of woe that's heavier every hour.
The queen, and generous AGIS too, discharge
'Ihe dues of kindred with unfeigned love.

BEu

But our acquaintance is not old enough
To yield a ripen'd sympathy, whose tate -
Alone can comfort such a mind as mine.
Yet I repent me not, in this extreme,
That 1 forsook my country and my friends.
They would have forc'd me to a loathed bed;
And torn me from the noblest of mankind.
If he should fall! my love! my only love!
Shall I survive thee; and return to Athens,, .
Be humbled there before my haughty kindred, '?
And hear them blame the ashes of LYSANDER ?
Forbid it, fearless love! forbid it, shame!
Forbid it, honour, and my nature's pride
Death lhall forbid it, for I dare to die.

Enter RHESUS.'

EVUANTHE.
RHESUS, great Gods! Oh fay, ho*v fares'LYsANDE R ?

RHESUS.
As well as glorious victory can make him.

EUANTHE.

Forgive my ralh despair, my thanks accept,
Ye gracious powers who guard his daring breast,
Where is he now?

RHESUS.
With Aci "in the senate.
EUA NTHE.
Already here ; blest be the G6ds of Greece It

F 6 RHSUS.

RHESUS.'

Soon as the trumpet from purfuitrecall'd
Our conquering Spartans, in the'field arriv'd
Aweary messenger, by AG s sent;
LYs A ND ER straight bespoke the royal band:
" With- all the speed of meh to Sparta haste,
" Chastise bold treason, and defend your king,'
He said; and call'd to me. With a few.horfe
I follow'd him: And when he fought the king,
By his command to you I brought thefe'tidings.

EUANTIHE.

Mot welcome RHESUS. But has Spartaloft
None of her noble youth ?

RHESUS.

-No man ofnote

Fell in the field but one, whose loss you'll mourn,
LYSANDER'S friend, AthenianPoLYDORUS.

EUANTHE.

Alas ! alas! my joy is mix'd with woe.
Unhappy youth! on my ill-omen'd head
'Ihe blame ofthyuntimely death will fall.
Conduaing me, thou cam'll to distant Sparta,
Fatal the honours Sparta's king beftow'd
Uon the generous guardian of EUANTHE.

RHESUs.

Lady, the people of my native land,
The warlike Thracians, hold it vain to mourn
For men who fall in battle; such they deem
The favourites of MA RS, our country's God.

· Those

Those they bewail who die by dire disease,
Of youth and vigour full. But'mol ofall
Lament old men, who drink the bitter dregs
Of life and woe, and in decrepit age;
(Extremity of dotage) wiih to live.

EUANTHE.

Who are these men who near the temple stand
Uncouth to me their garb, and strange their arms.

RHESUS.
They are Thracians, lady.
EUANTHE.
What seek they here ?

RHESUS.
I will accost the herald,
And learn his business.

EU'ANTHE.
To the palace, RIHESUS.

I go the willing messenger of joy.
This vitory will free the anxious Queen
From many fears. I pray thee do not tarry,
But come and tell me what yon herald bears,
And what-affairs ifill occupy the senate.

RHESUS.
Depend on the unwearied zeal of RHESUS.

[Exit RHESUS.

Manet EUANTHE.

Ac is and Sparta, and the public cares,
Detain LYSANDER from my longing eyes;
I fee the happy change of my condition,

~- And

And {hare the triumphs of the man-I love.
But yet the flighteR circumfiance creates
New fears to me. Why lingers thus LYSANDER!
My mind is not at reft; the winds are hufli'd,
But till my bosom quivers from the fiorm.

[Exit EUANTHE,
The End of the FIRST AeL,

ACT

A C T II.L

EUANTHE.

T HE IR tedious council now is at an end,
, And surely he will haften.to EUANTHE.
What means this clamour ?

[Shout of the People behind the Scenes.

Ha ! he comes, he comes !

Loud acclamations and the voice of joy
Proclaim the hero.

Enter LYSANDER.

LYSANDER.
O my life ! my love !

To meet thee here is happiness compleat.
The Gods have blest me to my utmost wilh,
And brought me full of gloryto EUANTHE.

EUA NTHE.

Thanks to the Gods who have preferv'd LYS A ND EJ.
Athenian Pallas sure has heard my prayers.

LYSANDER. N

And mine; for mutual is thelovers' prayer.
Another deity I now invoke,
Whose rites the God of war has long delay'd,

With

With peace well-pleas'd shall golden Hymen come,
And crown at lait our long eventful love.

EUANTHE. . :

Speak not of Hymen now: his torch for me
He ihall not light, whilst cruel Discord waves
Her horrid brand, and whilst unburied lies
Thy friend and mine, the generous POLYDORUS.

LYSANDER.

Tho' love and glory both my breast inspire,
And fortune smiles on both, yet sorrow finds .
A place to fit in: but 'tis temper'd sorrow;
For never Grecian hero greater died.

EUANTHE.

He fell the vi&im of his love to thee;
He follow'd thee when thou forfook'ft EUA NTHE,
Left me that day I touch'd the Spartan Ihore,
Tho' royal Acis begg'd thee to remain.

LYSANDER.

Unjust EUANTHE, thus'toblame LYSANDER
Who fought the field, the soldier of his love
As of his sacred country: fought to gain,
With liberty, a rank and place of honour,
Such as becomes the husband of EUANTHE;
That tender name, and names that wait upon it,
Awake emotions as implacable
To tyranny, as generous and great,
As ever felf-renouncing hero own'd.
When the chief aim is right, all passions else
Of noble kind impeil the. self-same way.

The

The lover and the husband rouse and fire
The Spartan and the man.
Of common clay, and in one common mold
Mankind are made; but the celefRial fire
That gives them life and foul, is liberty.
And I, Proinetheus-lile, to gain that fire
For Sparta's sons, would brave the bolt of Jove.

EUANTHE.

To me you need not vaunt your daring mind.
Alas! LYSANDER ! I am still afraid
Of perils lurking in this troubled frate.
O leave me not again to grief and fear,
And to AMPHARES.

LYSANDER.

Leave thee to AMPHARES !
EUANTHE.

Yes, in thy absence he did talk of love,
Boasted his wealth, his clients, and his power;
Mention'd the ruin of thy father's fortunes,
And spoke contemptuous of thy raih designs.

LYSANDER.

Immortal Gods ! Did I not hate this man
Enough ?

Enter a HELOT.
Whence, HELOT?

HELOT.

Lord, from Celimene.

(Delivers a Letter.

LYSANDER.

LYSANDER. (reads,)'

Let AGIS Jfand upon his guard to day,
This to LY SANDER from afaithfullfriend,-
'Helot, return, and tell the noble dame
That the remembrance of her generous mind
Shall live for ever in my grateful breast.

EUANTHE.
Who, is this faithful friend ?

LYSANDER.'

A Spartan dame,

A gentle one, tho' wedded to a foe
Of royal AGIS. In her virgin fate
She was the constant and the lov'd companion
Of fair DE IDAMIA, AGIS' fhort-liv'd queen.'
Thro' all our various firife, the generous dame
Preserves the friendships of her early days.
This scroll the King mutl fee. Farewel, EUANTHI,

EUANTHE.

Its threatning strain awakes my former fears.
Wou'd you had been, like me, content with lov,e,
And never left llyffus' flowery banks!
A fairer garland'there you might have won,
Than ever war beflow'd, the immortal wreath
Of PAL.LAS, queen of arts as well as arms.
But you forsook the vale, -and left the shade
To climb ambition's bare and rocky height,
To sand the storms and tempests of the world.

LYSANDER.
Your words, like melancholy music, take

Ml,

My lit'ning car, and cause delusive sadness;
For vain the malice of our baffled foes, t
A; d impotent will prove their last endeavours;
pat are the ftoims and tempefis of our fortune;
Let not EuANTHE heed the rack of clouds,
Nor dread the murmurs of the falling main.

EUANTHE.

Elate with viaory, you scorn your foes.
I wilh that RHESUs would return again
Eeforeyou go to AGcs..

LYSANDER.

Where is RHESUS ?

EUANTHE.

I saw some warriors clad in horrid arms
Near yonder temple sand. StraitRHEsus knew
The garb and arms of his own native Thrace,
And, wond'ring at the fight, went forth to learn -
Who and from whence they were.

LYSANDER.

That {hall be known.

In yonder temple fit the Ephori,
Those facious magistrates who love not AGIs.
If RHESUS come to you, detain him not;
Our resolutions may on him depend.

EUANTHE.

LYSANDER, flay; you go again to AGIs,
Perhaps to plan new perils to thy life;
If so, by all that's sacred I conjure thee
To let me know your purpose. Speak with me

Before

Before you execute what you resolve.
The image of the stern AMPHAREs haunts me;
Need I intreat thee to defend me from him.,

LYSANDER. .

No! by the Gods.! O. urge me not EUANTHE !
Nor rouse those thoughts a lover cannot bear.
Defend thee from AMPHA RES ! O my fair!
When thou art wrong'd, LYA NDE a lives no more!
But fee the King.

EUANTHE.

Let caution shew your love.
LYSANDER goes of towards that si

of the flage cwhere Ao Is atpears,

Manet EUANTHE.

If nature teaches me aright to read
The mind of man, this is a powerful spell
To charm the daring spirit of-LYSANDE R,
And make him think of me as well as Sparta.

[Exit EUANTH!;

;Enter Ads,.

LYSANDER.

Regard, 0 king, the warnings of a friend
Inftru&ed in the counsels of thy foes.
Behold the fledfalt faith of CELIM ENE.

[Gi'vis the kIter..

AGIS.

I cannot think so basely of the people.
For them I have unplum'd the regal power,

And

nd deck'd their freedom with the spoils of kings.
If they betray me; of all creatures, man
Is most ungrateful to his benefactor.
The generous courser and the faithful dog'
With true affeiodn love their gentle mailer;
Nay even the heavy ox, the stubborn mule,
Dullet of bealts, they know the'hand that feeds them.

LYSANDER.

Humanity lives in thy-breaf, 0 king!
And dictates confidence unlimited;
Virtue approves the generous extreme,
And magnanimity this error loves.
Let private men indulge the glorious fault,
And set their lives and fortunes on the faith
And gratitude of those they have oblig'd;
Botlet feverer prudence guard the heart
Of him whose brows are circled with a-crown.

Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

0 King the captain of Amycla's gate
Informs you that he has this hour descried
A band of men who halted near his post;
A thousand Thracians, they report themselves,
Hir'd by AMPHARES for SELEUCUS' service.

AGIs.
A thousand Thracians !

OFFICER.
On their march to Sardis.

LYSANDER.

LYSANDER.
By whose permission do they march this wiay? "

OFFICER.

Before the troops arriv'd, a herald came
Who to the Ephori a message bore.

AGIS.
Your diligence in duty I commend.

Exit OFFICEI,

LYSANDER.

The veil's withdrawn, and treason htands reveal'd, ;
:Ne'er shall AMPHARES need again forgiveness.
With what a double tongue the traitor spoke!
All-feeing Gods! how, little do we know
The greatness of those blessings you confer.
Had we not fought to day, had we not conquer'd, :
AGIS and Sparta had been loft for ever. r

AGIS.

This vieory came like the bolt of Jove,
And levell'd their designs.

LYSANDER.

Yet if they dare.

The worst of crimes, their treason may succeed.
Your troops, your conquering troops, are not arriv'd;
Th' aflembly meets; unguarded there you tfand;
What keeps the traitors from your noble life ?

AGIS.

My life! LYSANDER. No, I fear not that,
The antient annals of this land record,

Tat

hat barbarous foes revere the race divine,
nd turn in battle from a Spartan king.

LYSANDER.

he multitude may still revere their lord ' '
ho from the blood of great Alcides springs;
nd yet some impious hand may strike the prince,
ltho' of virtue as of race divine.

Aois.

I'l change the guards, and place at ev'ry gate
Some men of trust.

LYSANDER.
Mount your Theffalian steed,

And meet the troops that haften to your aid.
With eager steps the royal band advance,
And wish for nothing but their king to lead them.
Then if the furies in their wrath provoke
Your foes to rife in arms, let arms decide.
Ne'er were the good and bad winnow'd so well,
And fever'd from each other. Such the hosts,
And such will be their fate, as when the rage
Of earth-born giants dar'd the sons of heaven.

AGIS.

Thou reafon'ft like an anxious friend, LYSAN ER.
Thy fears are all for me, minefor my people.

Enter RHEsus.

Hail, gallant RHEus ; know's thou ought of those
Thy countrymen, who .thus unlook'd-for come,
And in a doubtful hour perplex our councils.

5 aaRss'ó'

RHESUS.

The Thracians are a thousand men complea t.
From snowy Hemus and the northern hills
Of wild Odryfus the fierce warriors come.
RHINALCES leads them, of illufirious birth;
But, stern, imperious, and grown old in arms,
He knows no umpire but the sword, no law
Except obedience to the prince he serves.

AGIS.

Such oft are those that quit a needy home
To serve as hirelings'in a tyrant's host.

RHESUS.

'Next in command, my brother Euxus flands,
A Youth to MARS devoted;' for he loves
Danger itself, not danger's rich reward.

LYSANDER.
Haft thou yet seen him ?

RH'ESUS.

No.
LYSANDER.

Has he yet heard
That thou art here in Sparta?

RHESUS.

He believes

That I am fill in Athens. From the herald
I kept my name and quality conceaP'd;
For I fufpe&ed that these Thracian troops,
Though hir'd for Asia, were for Sparta meant.
If it prove so, I may be useful here:

7 My

My valiant brother bears a'generous mind;
And, tho' of arms enamour'djufiice loves..

. AGs.

Hafle to youryaliant brother, and explain,
With an impartial tongue, the state of Sparta.
Shewhim where justice, and where honour sand.
If these are sacred, as thou fay'ft they are,
The gallant Euxu s, he may prove a friend.

LYSANDER.

Exert the Irongperfuafion of a brother;
And tell him, RHESUS, if he loves bright arms,
And that immortal glory valour gains,
No more to wield a mercenary fivord,
But plant himself with thee in Sparta's foil,
Where AGIS will his noble nature cherish,
And rear his courage to .such lofty deeds,
Asantientftory tells of Sparta's chiefs. [ExitRHEsu s

AGIS.

I hope that RHEsus will divide the Thracians:
This favours well the.biafs of my mind,
Averse to leave the city on suspicion,
And drive the wavering faction to extremes.

LYSANDER.

0 generous prince! whom I admire and blame.
Thegreatell foe, the foe LYSANDER dreads
Is the unequall'd gentleness of Agis.
Review the Itory of the Grecian hates,
And mark how freedom fell in every land.
The brave asserters of the public cause

G Have

Have ever been too mild in evil times; -
Have, like indulgent parents, spar'd the rod, :
And let the vices of their children live
To kill the virtues. Hence, let AGcI learn
The only lesson that his nature needs.

AcGIS.

Uncertain'is the peril if I flay,
But certain is the evil if I fly.
I will remain; but to assure my safety,
You muif, LYSANDER, to the troops return.

LYSANDER.

And leave my prince alone amidst his foes !- .
Revoke the hard command if you're refolv'd
To brave the peril, then my place I claim
Next to your person; by your fide 1 sand;
Perhaps 'ome noble service I may render,
Receive the mortal wound aim'd at my prince,
And with my life redeem the life of AGIS.

AGIS.

Your great imagination's up in arms;
But hear me, and let calmer reason judge.
I am determin'd not'to quit the city,
The guilt of civil war shall not be mine.
LYSANDER'S presence here without the troops
Would but embolden and excite my foes,
Who may be tempted by this fair occasion,
This mighty vantage, to furprize us both.
Without delay, once more, LYSANDER, arm,
And ostentatiously pass through the gate.

This vitory, and the approaching host
Will hush the threatned form;.

LYSANDER.

So may it prove.

But there is something in my heart rebels
Againit this counsel! Oh! I cannot-leave you-
Nor ought I now to fay. Let every man
Say in the morning that the day's his own:
Things pals belong to memory alone;
Things future are the property of hope.
The narrow line, the isthmus of there leas,
The infant scarce divisible, is all
That mortals have to sand on. O my prince !
LYSANDER leaves you with a heavy heart.

AGIs.

Farewel, thou Spartan of the antient mould,
Dear as the brother of his blood to AGIS !

[They embrace and part.
LYSANDER!

LYSAND E R.
Ha! may heaven your purpose change !

AGIS.

My will is six'd. But though my judgment too
Confirms the secret counsel of my heart,
Yet I may be deceiv'd ; perhaps,. my friend,
We part this moment ne'er to meet again.

LYSANDER.

Let tu not part at all. - 'Tis inspiration,
'Ihe guardian God, the Demon of the mind,
T'hus often preels on the human brcalt.

G 2 AcIs.

Acas. 'AGIS.

Mistake me not, I feel no new impression,
Nor if I did, should I by that be alter'd;
For such presage., be they fad or joyful,
I deem them but the meteors of the mind,
Bred by the inward elemental strife,
When great events perplex and .hake the foul.
My thoughts regard the state. If I Thould fall,
To thee, LYSANDER,I commit my son,
The only pledge of my DEiDAM'IA'S love.
Train up the boy to walk in the fame path'
Which we have trod together, the freight path
Of virtue and true glory. If he proves
Of noble nature, and I hope no less,
He will not ihun the lofty path of honour,
Tho' fate iould mark it with his father's blood.

LYS.ANDER.

Hear this, immortal Gods! who rule the world,
And guard a prince the image of yourselves!
O never, never may his royal race
LYSANDER'S aid require. [Exit LYSANDER

AcGI alone.

Affe&iori choaks his words,

His generous heart burnts at this solemn parting.
In times like these ofa declining slate,
Baseness inse&s the general race of men;
But yet these trying times rear up a fewv
More excellent, refin'd and conscious spirits,
More principled, and fit for all events,
Than any in the good, but equal, mals

Of a far better age. -Such is LYSANDER.
The hour draws near.

Enter SENATORS.

SENATORS..
Assembled Sparta waits.

AGIS.

I come, my friends ! I- will address the people,
Proclaim aloud mine atipns: which upbraid.
And soon flall silence, my despiteful foes.
Myheart shall speak. This sceptre ofmy father. ,
By long dercent hereditary mine,
I would disdain to hold, did I not hope,
That by its sway I might recall those days
When Lacedamnon was the pride of Greece,
The gaze and terror of the wondring world:
For there, as in.a chosen taemple, dwelt-
Valour and virtue, whilst attending fame
And glory on the land of heroes lhone.

Firit SENATOR.

0 Gods above! how happy were our fires,
In those bright days of antient glory born.

AGIS.

Those days ihall yet return, Olympian Jove
Or low in dust ihall Spartan AGIS lie.

[Sound of mufiral infirumnsns.

FirfR SENAT.OR.
What means this mufick ?

G 3 AGIS.

AGcs.

To the Gods of Greece

And Sparta's guardian deities it founds.
Let us begone, nor stop the holy train. Exezt,

Enter a Procession
AGESISTRATA, EUANTHB, Priests ofJUPITER t 1

HERCULES.

CHORUS. of Matrons and Virgins.

Woes aproach till now unknown;
,Discord -hakes the Spartan throne.
Heav'n avert the ills we fear!
Jove, from high Olympus, hear!

PrieRs of JUPITER.

This day our foes embattled came,
And.vow'd to end the Spartan name:
Embattled near our gates they fought;
But Jove for us deliverance wrought.
He smote Achaia's host with fear,
He thunder'd in their trembling rear;
Jove's,lightning flam'd from Sparta's spear.

CHORUS of Matrons and.Virgins.

Ever may his mighty arm
Save the Spartan slate from harm !
Ne'er may proud invader boas
Glory from our glory loflt.
Light, O Jove, that sacred fire
Which did Sparta's sons inspire,

When the prince and people strove,
Burning with their country's love.
Xelxes, lord of great alarms,
Xerxes rous'd the world to arms.

Priers of JUPITER.

The earth was troubled at his host,
The springs were dried, the rivers los;.
But Spartan valour check'd his pride,.
A slender band his holt defy'd:
ThermopylaE (immortal name!)
Beheld the Persian tyrant's shame.

CHORUS of all.

There the brave three hundred dy'd,
Faithful, by their prince's fide:
There they conquer'd, tho'they dy'd.

Priefis of HERCULES.

On earth below, in Heav'n above,
Rever'd, vitorious, fonof Jove!
Hear, Alcides, hear our prayer,.
Thy godlike offspring claims thy care,

CHORUS of all.

Bend thy bow, Tyrinthius, bend,
Lightly on-the earth descend.
Fix an arrow on the firing,
Stand beside the Spartan king,
AcGI of thy race divihe,
Tried in labours like to thine.

Undaunted, like thee, with monfers he strives;
The fiercef of Hydras in faaion revives.

Ge +I

If he falls a sacrifice,
Never'more lhall Sparta rife !

[Exeunt.] As the proceflion.gods

Enter AMPHARES.

Thus may my pious foes for ever firive,
Be theirs the airy aid'of'fabled Jove.
In nearer and more certain force I truss:
Of human race, I fight with mortal arms.
Yet prais'd be Fortune, goddess of my vows,
'Tis she whose happy hand leads forth these dames;
Ne'er to the palace halls their. feps return.
The net I've fpread:.now. covers all my foes,
Except LYS ANDER . O had he been here!
Then I had flood, like mighty Atlas, firm;
fIate but reserves him to another day.
The time is almost come; my Thracians now
Have reach'd their post;, and many a daring eye
looks for the signal. Here it is--~my sword.
When I appear thus arm'd, the furies rife;
'This is tie comet, the fierce blazing flar,
On which commotion, change, and death attend.

' [Exi' AiMPAREI,
The End of the SECOND AcT.

AC'

A C T III.

Enter EUANTHR.M

A THENIAN Pallas I .0 my native Gods!
J. Protec yeur suppliant in a foreign land,
Where Ihall Ifly ? O AGIS ! 0 LYSANDER r

Enter LYSANDER in a HEIOT's gar&
HELOT, if pity,. or if gold--

LYSANDER.

EUANT.HE !

EUANTHE.
0 Heavn andearth ! LYSANDER I

LYSANDER.

I,,. ..' Yes, mylov t r

jThou fee'ft LYSANDER, miserable man I
|Does AGls live?

, EUANTH.E.

AmidR the clash of arms,

fAndcries of fighting men, I heard them shout
iThe name of AcGI. By-and-by a Spartan,
[Fying and wounded, as he pass'd call'd out,
"The king isfafe; the king has gain'd the temple,'

LYSANDE.R.
Ten all is safe; for Sparta lives.in hi,

* - G 5 E}UAN. TH;E,

EUANTHE.
But the good..Queen!

LYSANDER.
Her sex, her age protecs her,
EUANTHE.

Heaven grant they may; an impious band in arms
Purfu'd'the holy train. Fear gave me speed,
For I outiript them alL But now,. LYSAiDER,.
Betray'd, encompafs'd, now what thall we. do

-LYSANDER.

Wert.thou but safely plac'd, LY SAN D.ER know.6
What he Ihoiild do. I must not tarry here.
There is a temple in this spacious city,.
For fantity above all others fam'd,
To Juno facrsed, the avenging Queen!
Thither a trulty slave of Acis' house
Will guide thy steps; by my command he waits
Without the palace.

EUANTHE.
Whither dost thou go ?
LYSANDER.

In this inglorious garb difguis'd, I wait
Till night and darkness come; then I attempt
The wall, where'er I find it.fiightly guarded.
What mortal arm shall then.oppofe my way,
Urg'd as 1 am ? Alas, my lov'd EUANTHE!
From my compliance with thy fond request
Springs the worst evil of this dreadful hour.
X have betray'd the confidence of AGIS:
But I'll repair my fault.

Eurarii~

EUANTHE. .

Wh'at dost thou mean ?

LYSANDEt.

AGIS commanded me to leave the city,
And thinks, would to the Gods he thought aright t
That his LYSANDER heads the Spartan troops,
In whom his only hope of safety lies.
But I, EUANTHE ! partial to thy willi
Sought thee in vain. In that unhappy time
They seiz'd the gates, and lhut me up in Sparta,
Fate punishes with too severe a doom
The human weaknefi of indulgent love.
AGIS ! I come !-For the deep voices now
Of duty, friendlhip, gratitude, and' glory,
Sound thro' my breast, and from my beating heart?
Their echo rings. Farewel! my love, farewell

EUANTHE.

Not yet, LYSANDER ! AGIS is oppreft,
And Sparta too. Does duty, or does honour,
Require LYSANDER, like an eastern lave,..
To fall attendant on the royal pile
What can you do ? The army will betray you :
So with the few, the faithful few that love you,,
You'll do some desperate aAion, and be slain..
If you despise your life, yet think of me,,
The prey of curt-AM PHARES.

LY.SAND'ER..

- - Infernal Gods !:
Letmenot tlink of that. Retire, EU ANTH-E,

G 6' Ani

And in the hallow'd temple reft secure.
This night I'll force ill-guarded Sparta's gates,
And save my prince, my country, and EUANTHE.

EUANT HE.

Thy prince, thy country are already loft.
0 linen, and preserve thyself and me:
The Ihip that bore me to the Spartan shore
Rides frill at anchor: leave this wretched land.
Where'er thou goeft I will attend thy teps;
Thy gods Ihall be my gods; thy people, mine.

LYSANDER.

Alas ! EUANTHE does not fee the ihame,
The ruin of that counsel love inspires.
Th' eternal gods repose this hour in me
No common truRf: Upon my deeds depend
The fate of AGis, and the fate of Sparta.
My soldiers too, my brave, my faithful soldiers,
The meanest warrior of the royal band
Freely devotes his life to godlike AcGs.
And hall their leader, fiall the friend of Acis,
Forsake his prince ? I will forget thy words;
Repeat them not.

EUANTHIE.

Is this LySANDER'S love.

Must I not speak ? Is my reward reproach ?
For you I left my friends and naive land,
Defy'd all danger, and all. censure fcorn'd;
New in my fore distress I call on thee
For whom I susser, to protect my honour,

And

And in my fore distress dolt thou upbraid m ?
If ever maid, like credulous EUANTrBE,
Buras all the bonds of nature for one man,
Let her beware that he be not a Spartan!
0 wretched maid! 0 Athens lot in vain !

[Ready io faint,

LYSANDER.

All.ruling powers ! why am I thus difreft ?
Why come calamities so thick upon me?
EUANTHE, hear me; you ihall be obey'd.
I'll bear thee hence, and go with thee to Athens,
Reltore thee to thy country and thy friends,
Of whom thou dost complain I have bereft thee.
LYSANDER will acquit hmfelf to thee,
And to mankind-

EUANTHE.
Delude me not. Alas!

Thy tongue speaks comfort; but thy voice, thylooks,
Wild and unsettled, drive me to despair:
For thou, methinks, art desperate, LY SANDER,
Those lips that quiver, and those eyes that roll
Like dragon's eyes, those are not signs of love-!
Thou fay't that thou wilt bear me back to Athens;
Willthat acquit thee, if thou leav'ft meethere?
Isthat thy purpose?

LYSANDER.

Yes. I'll leave the world .
And death fall wipedilhonour fcom my name;

A Acs9

AcGI and Sparta 'hall forgive me then,
And every debt be paid. -

EVANTHE.

LYSAND.E , 'no

Love's vicims are not of your fierner-fex. '
It is the destiny of womankind
Constant to live, and desolate to' die..
To firong necessity EUANTHE yields,'.
If I should tear you from the fide of Ac is,
I fee my fate; you ne'er would.love me more:
Tho' you hould live, yet you would die-to me.
But Iwill rather flay and perish here
Than live without thee; Go, and fight for Acts;
But in the hour of danger thinkl of me I
Calm in the rear dire& the course of battle.
The dreadful van. let other warriors lead,
Inwhom nor AcIsnor EUANT HE lives.

LYSANDER.

These words become my idoliz'd EUANTHE !
And honour now approves the voice of love.
O thou first objet of my young desires,
And thro' each period of my ripening years
Still more maturely and intensely lov'd,
Hear and believe my words.-Beware-Beware.

Enter AMPHARES.

' ' ~ ' p~[lo his tlk,]

4Tis she, by Venus! halt. Fear not, my fair,
Nor mneditate escape from your AMPHAREs.

EUAtlT~H1;

' EUANTHE.
MyAMpHARES!

AMPHARES.
Thine, and thine alone!

Thou low'ring lave, begone! Haste! ,urge me not
To ain my sword with thyignoble'blood.

[Exit LYSANDERI

EUANTHE.

Is this thy love? Imperious, and in arms,
Recent from blood and treason, dolt thou comes
To take by force and violence my heart ?

A.SHA,RES.

The love of thee, more powerful than ambition,
Inflam'd me to attempt the Spartan throne.
Thy beauty is the torchthat lights the war:
For thee I conquer-Smile not thus in scorn,
Deign to accept my hand and Sparta's crown.

EUANTHE.

Dost thou bellow the diadem of Spartal
Where is thy lawful prince .

AMPHARES.

LE.ONIDAS

E.ANTHE.
AGIS.

AMPHARES.

That AGIS is no more a king,

A suppliant, surrounded by my troops,
In Juno's temple, with the priests he dwells.
LEONIDAS, by me refor'd to powers.

mill

Will gladly ihare with me divided empire,
Or, if I pleale to reign alone, I may. .
Thro' dark conspiracy and open strife,
For thee I strove ; thou. wiltireward my love.
Beauty, like thine, pertains notto the vanquih',
But fill triitmphant reigns the victor's queen.

EUANTRE.

Think's thou there is. no truth in human breats,
No faithful loyalty, no corntant love ?
Soon lhalt thou learn thine error. I begin
To teach thee first. Thee and thy love I scorn!
And may the gods reward thy base ambition
As I reward thy love.

AMPHARES.,

0 womankind!

How well your pailons teach us to be juR!
You loveLysANDER fill; alittle time
Will from your mind erase the memory
Of that vain-glorious, loft, and ruin'd man,
Who was my rival.

EUANTHE. -
Was whate'er he was

He is, and more. Thou and thy crimes contribute
To make him more illuitrious, more belovtd,
Thou giv'I him fcope.and vantage to his virtue.
Speak'ft thou of crowns whilst royal AG Is reigns?
Of power in Sparta whilst LYSANDER lives 2-
The Ihort dominion of this day is thine,
But vengeance and LYSANDXR come .to morrow.

* '' AM'

. AMPHARES.

Thoudo't inftrua me. Ifmy timeis flort,
ie lhould not part. I'llsee thee fafelyplac'd&
Where I command. -

EUANTHE.

.I will not go with thee.

AMPHARES.

Yield to necessity; for on my call
Compulsion waits. No other hand than mine
Should touch EUANTHE.

[Seizes her hand.]
EUANTHE.

Help, Spartans ! help!
If any hear me who regard LYSAND ER.

Enter TLYsA ND ER with a dagger, and

runs at AMPHARES, ,wbo retires.

AMPHARES.

Aflif me, friends. Surround him-'Tis LYSANDER.
Take him alive.

[TO his people 'who enter.]

LYSANDER. .
No. That they cannot, traitor!

[Snatches a fvwordfrom one of the foldieri.
Now I am better arm'd.

AMPHARES.

Kill him, Euxus,
Unless he yield his sword.

LYSANDER;

LYSANDER.

Come, brave AMPHARESI
Come to the front, and there diref my fate.

AMPHARES.
Kill him t

Euxus.

That woulddifhonour me for ever.
Advance on all fides, and close in upon him.

LYSANDER.

Strangers, give way, and let the Spartan chiefs
Fight their own quarrels. I will give you all
The wealth of Sparta.

AMPHARES.

Ha ! he grows upon them!
Throw down your weapons; or I'll pietce her heart!

[Points hihfword Io EVANTE's; Sre

Euxus.' .
Renown'd LYSANDER ! give thy sword to Euxvs.

EUANTHE.
Defend thy noble life ! Regard not mine.

[AMPHARES lifts ksIti

LYSANDER.
Hold, hold.

AMPHARES.
-Thou know'n me.-Chufe».
LYSANDER.
I cannot bear to fee EUANTHE die!

- [Throws dfwn sbimir
O Ac s ! O my prince !

1,,

AMPHARES.

Victorious chief,

Staterman and soldier, learned Athens'.boaft,
Where are thy glories now?

LYSANDER.

The strife of tongues
Ilhun, as thou didft shun the Rrife of arms.

AMPHARES.

Yet let thy haughtiness grant one requel.
Tell me what brought the great LYSANDER hither ?
Some firatagem profound; which none but he
Could have contriv'd to haften his deftrudion,
And add disgrace and ridicule.to ruin.

LYSANDER.

Had'st thou not fled, thou coward, from my sword,;
And lhriek'd for help, this arm, this single arm,
Had baffled all the craft of false AMPHARES.

AMPHARES.
' ThiL pride becomes thee, and thy lot condition,

LYSANDER.

Inthis condition it becomes me befl
'Tobrave AMPHARES. Had he been a captive
flsould have pitied him.

AMPHARES.

Plead'ft thou for pity?

LYSANDER.

For none that thou canst give. Hear me, thenjudge,
If what I speak is meant to win thy favour.
Ilhould have pitied thee by fate subdued:

Opprelt

Oppreft with crimes, thy fpirit.would have Ihrunk
Under calamity, and guilt have marr'd
The noble vigor and the port of manhood.
Amidit thy triumph, does it not confound thee,
To think thou ow't it to excess of bafenes ?
Thou haft prevail'd, because the generous AcGI
Would not believe there could be such a traitor.

AMPHARES.

Oft have I heard, and often seen thy'folly;
But now to rail is madness. With one word
I could impose on thee eternal silence.

LYSANDER.

And would-I know thee-if thou thought'l it wife
Even then, as now, I' hould contemn thy power:
But know, I fear thee not. The kingis safe,
And his victorious troops at break of day ',
Will thunder in thine ears: thou and thy baand
Will ill fuflain the shock of such an hofR.
My life is in thy hands, but yet berate,
Thy fate depends on.mine. In Lacedaemon
A prince like Acis soon will find LYSANDEA .

AMPHARES.

Uncertain thy predictions of the future:
Small is thy prescience, witness thy condition;
Euxs,. conduct him to yon corner tower.

EUANTHE.
LYSANDER!

LYSARDER.

'Oh! I have withdrawn my eyes
From thee, and to contention turn'd nmyheart.

EUANTHE.

-EUANTHE.
Yet look on me beforewe.part for ever.

LYSANDER. ;

At looks or words of tenderinefs he'll smile,
And o'er the sorrows of our love rejoice; -
Forgive me fill, I mull not; cannot speak,

EUANTHE.

But I will speak, and. earth and heaven {hall hear me;
AMPHARES too shall hear; for it will-gall him
To hear EUANTHE now avow her love
And faith toher LYSANDER. Powerful words,
Emblems and figures of firm conflancy,
Such as fond lovers lavi fhly employ
To sooth the pangs of parting and of abSence.
Such music vows accord not with our fate,
Our dreadful state: yet do not grieve Thy heart,
Thynoble heart, too fall-ofother sorrows,
With thoughts of what may-happen to EUANTHE.
Nothing (hall happen to debate EUANTHE.
The bondage and the shame that women susser,
Who live the slaves of those who flew their lords,
I ne'er lhall know, I never will endure.
If cruel destiny decrees thy fall,
Unspotted to the shades I'll follow thee,
For whom alone on earth I'd wish to live.

LYSANDER.
Lead on, Farewel, EUANTIHE.

EUANTHE.

Gods above !

AM-

'AMPHARES.

Condu& her to the tower where late you lodg'd
The captive queen.

EUANTHE.

Alas! no guarded tower,

Or vaulted dungeon, ever yet contain'd
Two emore unhappy, or more helpless captives!

[Exeunt guardS

AMPHARES.

LYsANDER's fierce demeanourand his threats,
Proud as he is, spring not from pride alone s
I must itretch forth my arms to Ihelter'd AGIs.
If I accomplih not this night his ruin,
To-morrow's rising fun may fee my fall.
Curit be the temples ! curs the priefis of Sparta!
Now I am like a man who has adventur'd
To cross the flats forsaken by-the main,
And looking back fees not the lhore he left;
Thro' deeps and Ihallows, rocks, and quaking fandt,
Onhemu fgo. To fop is fureperdition.

Enter SANDANE.
Hail to the queen of Sparta !

SANDANE.

' Yes, AMiPHARES;

Now fortune seems to smile upon SANDANE.
I saw the fullen captive led along,
His gloomy eye-balls six'd upon the earth.

- - Aeon~~~~~~~~~~~~.'!

AMPHARES.

is night, 0 queen! mufl fee the bold conclusion,
fa design, thus far so bravely borne. i;
nhollow and deceitful ground we tread,.
ill AGIS lives.

SANDANE. I
Thou fpeak'ft my very thoughts,,

aonsthere are, AMPHARES, which suspend
fandimonious reverence and refpea.

AMPHARES.

mples, and priefls, and altars shall not save him,
fatelhould drive us to the Iaf extreme;
eanwhile, I will employ more gentle means
gain our ends: For sacrilege would rouse
he zealous multitude to rage and arms.
e temple is begirt with Thracian bands,
oall access forbid: and AGIS knows not
hathas befallen LYSANDER. I will fend
subtle Spartan in LYSA NDE R'S name,
o may by specious arguments persuade him
?quit the fancuary; and then, 0 queen !
ith all solemnity of pomp and form,
'afiembled Ephori hall pats his doom,
rdinathe fame decree include LYSANDER.

SANDANE.

hink't thou the Ephori will give the fanation
their authority to AGIS' death?

AMPHARES.

ey will. At midnight the flern judges meet
Terror's temple; they have charg'd a herald

With

With orders to the troops'not to advance
On pain f treason. The aftonifli'd people
Will crouch and tremble at that awful power,
Which draws the sword ofjufticeon aking.
Then ihall your lord's authorityrevive:;
And like the fun, when burlting from a cloud,
With greaier powier and brighter iplendor Ihine.

[Extar,
The End of the THIRD ACT.

ACT

A C T IV.
LYSANDER as a Prifnner, the Thracian Guards

at a d/ifance.

LYSANDER mrfmg, advances and peaks.

A S virtue no prerogative on earth?

. And can the Gods permit the fall of Ar s i'
They can. 'Tis man's own arrogance arrays him
In gorgeous titles of excelling nature,
Care of the Gods, and centre of creation.
Ifear, I fear man's life is but a dream;
His foul a subtile essence of the blood,
A rainbow beauty, made to lhine a space,
Thenmelt and vanish into air.
Ye mighty minds of fages and of heroes !
Epaminondas, Plato, great Lycurgus!
Who once with such transcendent glory ihone,
Brighter than all the flars that deck the heavens,
Is your celeflial fire for'ever quench'd,
And nought but.aflles left, the sport of chance,
Which veering winds fill blow about the world ?
I will not thnk To ! Yet, alas! the while
1 fee and feel presages that alarm.
If they prove true. If man is like the leaf,

H Which

Which falling from the tree revives no more,
I lhall be Ihortly dust. That will not hear
EUANTHE weep, nor fee the shame of Sparta!
Now I'm a living man, my mindis free,
And, whilf I live and breathe, by heaven I'll at
As if I were immortal.

Enter RHESUS and Euxus.

RHESUS.

See where he itands! behold him !-- my brother!
The bravelt and the best of human kind.
Oppreft with grief and lhame, andfatal love,
Indignant virtue but augments his pain.
Will not my Euxus give his aid to heave
This noble vessel from the rock it beats on ?

[Goes up to LYSANDER,
My lord I my leader! Oh I

LYSANDER.

My faithful RHESUS !

Com'itythou to share the ruin that LYSANDER
Has brought upon himself, his prince, his country?

RHESUS.

Icome more eager and more proud to ihare
Thy present fortune, than thy former glory.
Alas, my lord! 'twould make a firanger weep,
-To fee the chief, whom conquest crown'd to-day,

A captive.

LY

LYSANDER.

RHESUS, thou has nam'd the leaf

Ofmycalamities. I could endure,
With Spartan fortitude, my own difalters;
Bear to be hurled from meridian glory,
And, like a falling star, be seen no more.
Butoh! the king!-and desolate EUANTHE !

RIHESUS.
Do not despair.

LYSANDER.

Thou art my only hope.

This day thy generous brother fav'd my life;
At his request I yielded up my sword,
Else had LYs AN DE R like a soldier fall'n.
Thou art my friend in noble perils prov'd.
UMyfate, the fate of Sparta, and of AcIs,
Is in the hands of Eu x'us-

RHESUS.

Ah! my brother!

Euxus.

0 chief of Sparta! Euxus is difireft
On every fide. Thy virtue, thy misfortunes,
Have touch'd my heart: but here in trust I tand.
Would I had never seen the walls of Sparta!

LYSA NDER.

The Gods, the guardian Gods of Lacedamon,
Have brought you hither to preserve a people,
And save from traitors' hands the best of kings.
Altho' at firlt you ralhly drew the sword

Hs z In

In blind obedience to a leader's will,
The gallant Euxus will not sure persist
In error known, in manifest injuRice.
Thy trade is war, brave soldier; this is not
An office for thy sword.

Euxus.

True are thy words.

I was indeed deceiv'd; and came not here
To mix in Sparta's strife; but honour now-

~- ~RHESUS.

I will not hear thee plead so bad a cause.
Is there a bond in nature like the tie
Which binds the hearts of brothers ? And will Euxus,
'From vain ideas of fidelity
To that deteted traitor, falfeAMPHAR Es,
His brother murder?

Euxus.
No.
RHESUS.

Then let thy arms

Defend LYSANDER. By our country's Gods
I swear, and by our warlike father's foul,
Whose well-beloved son thou ever wert,
That with the Spartan chief thy brother dies.

LYSANDER.

Might-you not.favour the escape ofAGis ?
The guards are Thracians.

Euxus.

I might favour thine,
My power extends not to the guards of A Is.

RHE SU.

RHESUS.
And wilt thou not ?

Euxus.
Command thyself, my brother.
RHESUS.
Hlow canis thou hesitate ?

Euxus.

I must beware,

Inferior in command to bold RHINALCES,
And ever view'd by him with jealous eyes.
VWhilfl I deliberate, no time is loft.
The light of day suits not with your designs;
Before the night comes on, I will determine,

LYSANDER.

Tisalmoft night, the fun hath left the heavens,
And doubtful twilight ushers in the gloom.
Perhaps the enemies of Ac is wait
The darkness of the night to cover deeds
They dare not aft by day. This night I dread--

RHESUS.

The Ephori have sent a herald forth,
Charg'd with Come solemn menace, and command
To flop the army's march.

LYSANDER.

Js they obey,

The fane of Juno guards the king no more !
EternalGods! howwretched is LYSANDER !
From me that herald should have heard his answer.
,Cannot my RHESUS find one gallant Spartan

H 3 To

To bear my oiders to the royal band
To torm the city ? -

RHESUS.
I myself will bear
These orders to the camp.

LYSANDER.

Another ta&,

More difficult and dangerous, is thine.
Assume the arms and vesture of thy country,
And thro' the.Thracians win thy way to AGIS,
RH ESUs, the generous spirit ofthatprince
- Is of a nature that excludes all fear,
Consideration, and refpe& of Self:
On earth he aas as ifheewere a God,
Immortal, and incapable of harm.
Think how the artful fallhood of AMPHA'RE
May operate on such a royal mind.

Enter adThracian.

THRACIAN.
The Spartan lord draws near.

Euxus.-

AMPHIAR ES -COme

Retire, my lord, whilst I advance to meet him:
Our intercourse might lead him to suspicion.

LYSANDEiR.

Nor vigilance nor care I recommend
To thee, my RHESUS ! But let caution rule
Thy forward zeal.

t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~IIS$

RHESUS.
It Ihall, my noble lord:

My heart beats high with hope to fee thee rife
Once more, like Mars, in arms.

LYSANDER.

Eternal Gods !
InThracian breads the Spartan virtue lives.

[Ly SANDER enters into the lower.

[Exit RHESUS.

Manet Euxus,

Enter AMPHARES.'
How does the haughty captive brook confinement ?

Euxus.

Fullof inquietude he seems, and sadness.
Now in some pensive poflure fits a-while,
Then smites his breast, and, starting from his feat,
Walks to and fro with a diforder'd pace.

AMPHARES.

Admit no Spartan of whatever sex,
Orwhatfoe'er affinity they claim.

Euxus.
That friE command hath been already given.

AMPHARES.

'Tisneedful, Eux us, forhis furious mind,
Inthis extreme, will snatch at flight occasions
Tomanke incredible and wild attempts.
Renew the charge; then go and search LYSAND ER

H 4 For

For secret weapons. On his breat he wears
A curious gorget, rich with precious toines,
And a small portrait of surpassing beauty,
The image of the fair Athenian maid,
Drawn by an artist who has .vied.with nature
In sweet expression of her matchless charms:
That I must have.

Euxus.
You shall without delay.

[Exit Euxus,

Manet AMPHAR ES. 'I

'et other men deprive themselves of pleasure,
And toil for bare ambition; I'll provide .'
A more luxurious banquet to my tafie.
What tho' as yet EUANTHB loves me not,
It is the nature of her sex to change.
With wondrous ease the female kind submit
To deltiny; and soon are reconcil'd
To persons and conditions once abhorr'd.
Like birds new caught, who flutter for a time,
And itruggle with captivity in vain;
But by-and-by they reft; they smooth their plumes,
And to new masters sing their former notes.
This facile temper of the beauteous sex
Great Agamemnon, brave Pelides, prov'd:
They sack'd the cities, and they flew the fires,
The brothers, and the lovers of the fair,'

Who

Who weep'd a while, then wip'd their watry eyes,
'AndloRttheir sorrows in the hero's arms.

Enter SANDANE.

The herald is return'd. The royal band,
Infam'd with rage and scorn, the mandate tore;
And to the city bend their rapid march.

AMPHARES.

Let them advance. They haften to their fate.
A secret itratagem I have devis'd
To check there warriors in their bold career.

SANDANE.
The Ephori in resolution faint-

AMPHARES.

Their courage I'll restore; for AGIS yields.
Tothe fallacious counsellor I sent.
DIMOCHARES, in sacerdotal robes,
As if difguis'd t'elude the Thracian guards,
Pal in by my permission, and conjur'd
Acss to quit the fane's uncertain {helter,
And seek the sure protecion of the camp :
Himfelfhe, offer'd as his faithful guide.
This in LYSANDER'S name. AG s at firlf,
Ireolute and doubtful, balanc'd much:
Atlaft this thought sprung up, and turn'd the scale:
That his escape would force us to fubmifflion,
And end the itrife without the ihock of arms.
DMhOCHARES at midnight is appointed -

H 5 To.

Tocome again; and goes with an addition
Thatwill give certain credence to hiswords;
The gorget of LYANDER.

SANDANE.

Now, AMPHARES,

I fee the snares of death are wrapt around him;
Our hated foe sands on the verge of fate:
He who defpis'd SANDANE, and permitted,
With molt inulting courtesy, my flay;
I would not have remain'd one day in Sparta,
But for the hope I had to work his ruin.
He is the root, with him the branches fall.

AMPHARES.

A!hho his son is safe in Orchomenos,
Yet there in hopeless exile he muff live.
But ACES STRATA- .--

SANDANE.

Shall not survive

To travel suppliant thro' the states of Greece,
And shew her hoary hairs with afhesfitrew'd,
To move companion in the giddy Greeks.
She's old, and fit to die.

Enter a Spartan me/feniger.

The Thraciantroops

Who guard the temple, faithful to their charge,
Have seiz'd a spy; who, cloath'd. and arm'd like them,
Attempted to pass thro' their ranks to AGIS,

ReBI

RHIgALCEs for a while delay'd the doom
That martial law decrees, itill you yurfelf
Discourse and judge the captive.

AMPHAR.ES.

I approve
The vigilance and condut of RH I NALCES.

[Exit Messenger.

SANDANE;

Still flows the tide of fortune; I'll dispatch
ORONTES tomylord. Joyful he comes
Tore-affume his sceptre and his throne.
Farewel refraint, and laws that bind a prince.
fh hpeople's majelty, the senate's power,
Shall Ihrink beneath their awful monarch's ifwrd.
Fear is the only principle of rule,
Which man, like other animals, obeys.

[Exit SAN.DANE.

Manet AMPHARES.
Why tarries Euxus now? -

Enter Euxus.

I mull applaud

Thycountrymen for discipline and care,
Aswell as valour; they have seiz'd a spy,
Who mix'd with them, difguis'd in Thracian arms.

Euxus.
InThracian arms

H 6 AM-

AMPHARES.

Yes,,to pass to Acs.

Some bold adventurer of the.royal band,
Whose life-Why art thou troubled? Has LYsA DER
Efcap'd the guards ?

Euxus.
Evxs. . . .

-, . No. I am pale with anger,

At the reproachful terms, the bitter taunts,
Which Ihave fuffer'd from incens'd LxSAtDER,
In execution of thy late commands.

[Girves the goret,
.AMPHARES.

Is that the caufee
He soon shall be no obje& of thy wrath.

[Exit AMPHARES.

Manet: Euxus.

My brother seiz'd! I hesitate no more.
The voice of nature in my breast exclaims
Againfr the rigotir'of those guilty laws,
Which bind a soldier blindly to obey.
Son of my mother ! Brother of my blood!
I fly to save thee.-Now I'm thine, LYSANDER.

[Goes to the gate of the lower.
Chief of Sparta!

Enter LYSANDER.

Is Euxus yet refolv'd ?.

Euxus.

Euxps ...

That thou shalt fee, thy'enemies are mine.
RHESUS is taken.

LYSANDER.

My contagious fate
Insets my friends! my brave, my generousRHEsus !

Euxus.

Friend of my brother! firt I set thee free.
An officer of mine commands that gate
At which the Thiacians enter'd; haste thee thither,
Array'd like one of those whom I will fend:
To guide thy steps.

LYSANDER.
Ye guardian Gods of Greece!

Whose ways mysterious fondly I arraign'd,.
Forgive my rashness! Prosper now my sword-
Where are my arms ?

[WFhil LYSAkDERIpeaks, Euxus beckons one of
his oldiers.

Buxus.

Here enter, and obey
Without reply. [Exeunt LYSANDER and the Thra.

cian to the tower.

The soldiers hearts are mine.

Their various toils and perils I have shar'd,
Nay more than lhar'd, the first in hard extremes,
When signal danger claims a leader's ivord.
No spoil, no treasure, have I e'er referv'd;
The wealth I covet is the soldier's love.

My

My bold Odryfians are a faithful band;
In this difirefi tIll throw myfelfon -them,
They will support me.

Enter a Spartan merenger.

MESSENGER.

Leader of Thracian bands!

AMPHARES and the magistrates frSparita,
Met in the fenate-ho'ife, expetl thy prese'nce.

Euxus.
I will attend them. [Exii neinigr

Surely they have learned,

That I am brother to ill-fated RHESUS.
Enter LYSAIN4ER in Thracian dress ani arms'

LYSANDER.

Once more at liberty! Once more in arms!
To thee, brave Thracian

Euxus.

I am fummon'd hence

To meet theEphori. I fear, my lord,
They have difcover'd RHESUS is my brother.

LYSANDER.

That secret.in your bread and his is lodg'd:
Nor can his alter'd features now betray him.-
In early youth he left his -native land;
The heat offummer, and the winter's cdld,
In many a hard campaign, have chas'd his bloom. ;

Euxus.

Euxus.
Indeed I knew him not.

LYSANDER.

Then who could know him?

Calm and determin'd to the fenate.go:
Here I'll remain, and wait your quick return.
To know what they design importsus much.

Euxus.
Your Ray is full of danger; rii -it hot.

LYSAANDER.

All necessary dangers must be rifk'd.
Perhaps I am the fubje&dof their councils,
Perhaps I may be call'd before the ,senate!
If I appear not, you must be difcover'd,
And my escape too soon to them be known.

Euxus.

Your reasons are of force. I am convinicd.
Here, take my fivord. Then, if we are betray'd,
My troops obey you. Now, my bold SITHONTES,

[so one of his Thracians.

Draw your battalion nearer to the square,
And guard the person of this Spartan chief
Asyou would guard myself. IfI'm detain'd,
Follow to death or vitory LYSAND ER.

[Exit Euxus.

LY¥ANDER.

Shall I obey the impulse of my heart,
And lead there Thracians to the tower that holds
Mly loft EUANTHE ? No, let reason rule.

AMPHARES

AMPHARES will not, dares not, wrong her honour,
Whilfi undecided is the fate of-AGIS.:
'Tis night, but never ihall the morning rife
On-Who can know the secret will of heaven !
Down, down, enthufiafin! my heart be calm !
A little while, and thou shalt beat no more.
Oft have I wish'd for perilous occasions;
And, wandring in the academic grove,*
Have rous'd myself with firong imagination
Of great exploits by ardent valour done:
But ne'er did fancy's tempest match the truth,
The strong reality of such a storm.
O did I combat but for life alone,
Were Sparta and EuANTHE safe fpecators,
How gayly should Lys A NDER take the field.-
Euxus draws near-Upon the infe& wing
Of a small moment ride th' eternal fates.

Enter Euxus%

My fears are vain. The secret is unknown.
But RHESUS is condemn'd to die to-morrow.

LYSANDER.

To-morrow ! many men will die to-morrow,
Who are not yet condemn'd.

Euxus.

'Tis true by heaven!

Mortal designs and enterprizes rife
On every fide. The Ephori resolve
At midnight to furprize the royal band,

And

iAnd order'd me to hold my troops prepar'd
Their forces to fuifain.

LYSANDER.

'Tis well! 'tis wondrous well!

They urge me now, and point the line of ation.
Under the high up-lifted arm of fate
T'llrulh, and firike before their blow can fall.
1'llllorm the city while they force thecamp.
Your troops-

Euxus.
Shall join you at the gate. The word t

LYSANDER.

Als. Farewel ! Now I ihall save thee, AGIS,
;Or leave my blood upon the stones of Sparta.

[Exeunt LYSANDE R and Euxus.
T'k End of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT

A CT V.
AMPHARES andthe Ephori with the Ofers,&c,

ie gate gateof the prn seen at 'a difance,

Firfd EPHORB,
THE hour is-paif.

Second EPHORi.
.Ifear-

AMPHAR-ES.
Silence. He comes.
I hear the Reps of wary treading feet.

Enter a Spartan, AGIS following,

AGIS.

This way condufts iot to AniycIa's gate.
Ah ! whither dost thou lead me?

AMPHARES.

To thy death.
The Ephori of Sparta have condemn'd thee.

AGIS.

I am betray'd ! What mockery is this
Of sacred juitice ? Lay aside the robes

And

And ensigns of authority prophan'd
The pomp of magifiracy suits not treason.

AMPHAR.ES.

The licence of thy tongue affronts the laws,
Where awful rev'rence our high office bears.

AcIs.

Know ye not this, ye guardians of the laws,
The meanefi citizen of Lacedaemon.
Without free trial cannot be condemn'd;
Much less your king. 'What law have I tranfgrefs'd i
Point out my crime; produce my bold accusers,

AMPHARES.
Thy crime is tyranny.

*AGIS.
Is that my crime ?

Had Acs-.been a tyrant, thou had'st been
His fawning slave, thou enemy of freedom.

AMPHAR'ES.

Behold the ftubborn'fpirit of this man:
He breathes his native arrogance, and till
Insults his judges, and avows his crimes.

AGIS.-

Who made you judges of the life of AGIS ?
Butyouhave judg'd. yourselves, and earth, and heaven,
Know how unjustly. To the Gods above,
The sure avengers of a murder'd king, ,
I make my lat appeal. Their messenger
Ison the wing; LYSANDER comes apace;
AndNEMESIS direas his righteous sword.

AMPHARES.

AMPHARES.

Proceeds this boldness from thy trust in him?
Thy great avenger is, like thee, a captive, '
And under the-fane mortal sentence lies.

AGI s.

Ye powers above! LYSANDER too a captive!
Where was he taker ?

AMPlHARES.

In the fireets of Sparta,
Clad in the servile garment of a Helot.

AGIS. ·: .

Alas! alas! LYSANDER I 0 my friend!
Thy love for me, thy generous, fearless love,
Has wrought thy fall. - For me thou cam'l to Sparta
And, like the parent bird hov'ring too near
Its captive young, thy noble life is loft!-..
Forgive these tears, my country! Ac is weeps
For thee. Alas! thy brave defender's gone!
O Lacedaemon, thou art fallen for ever! '
Thy bad efate.Ihall every day grow worse;-
Succeflive tyrants lhall exhaust thy strength,
Till all thy generous youths have bled in vain;
At last the consummation of thy woes
Shall come upon thee; some ambitious foe
Shall itretch the iron arm of conqueRs forth,
And grasp thee in the circle of his empire.
My native land, the kingdom of my fathers,
Shall be no more a nation ! O my country,
How irretrievable is thy condition !

The

The Macedonian vulture hovers o'er thee,
Soon todefcend, and on thy vitals prey.

AMPHARES.

Thoumay'it delay, perhaps avoid, thy death.
Send forth thy mandate to the royal band,
To halt till further orders.

Ac is.

Ha! No more

Itrufl thee, traitor. Would I had ever been
' hus deaf to thee ! No, let the royal band
Revenge their gallant leader and'their king.

FirIt EPHORE.
Thou tempt't thy fate.

AGIS.

I scorn it. Since my hope

'Of Sparta's loft, and my beloved friend
Hasperifh'd in my cause, why should I live?
In any period of my former days
I rather would have chore to die attempting
The glorious design, which you have ruin'd,
Than live the prince of a degenerate people,
The tame fpeEator of a falling empire.

Firit EPHORE.
To Reason hearken.

Ac is.

Reason bids me die,

As I have liv'd, unalter'd in my love
To Sparta, and unconquer'd in my purpose.
You mean to, take advantage of my Rate,

Without

Without spectator, counsellor, or friend:
You think I dread the fern approach of.death;,
Because the blooming season of my life
Still promises a long extent of years:
But my forefathers blood is in my veins,
The blood of heroes, and of Spartan kings,
Less only than the Gods. I dare your wori,
And with my dying breath acquitmy people.
The people rose; they'hearken'd to the voice
Of Liberty, and blest the name. of AG s.
But you, the nobles, an inglorious race,
Base as the dastard and unarmed Helots,
With foreign arms ard mercenary aid,
Bore down the people and oppreit your prince,
Whom death delivers. AGIS shall not fee
The last convulsions of expiring Freedom.
For in the first he dies.

AMPHARES.

We'll hear no more

Of these invectives. Bear him to the place
Of execution. Officers, advance
And do your duty.

OFFICERS.
This is not our duty.
AMPHARES.
What!

OFFiCERS.
Murder of a king is not our duty.

6 AMPHARES

AMPHARES.

Mtinous slaves ! for you I'll find a time.
Sir. [ E AGIS.].

Aois.

Touch me not, for uncompell'd I go

To meet my de'tiny. Weep notfor me, [o an oficer.
O! thou whose nature suits not thy employment,
Weep not for me I would not change conditions
With there bad men. I (hall not feel the woes
That thou and all must feel, the woes of Sparta!
0! might my death avail my much-lov'd country,
I'd dic as joyful then, as fearless now.

[Exit AcIS guarded.

AMPHARES.

Atone your insolence by prompt obedience,
Ordeath's your portion. To an Offcer..

[Exeunt .with Acts.
Manet AMPHARES, &C.

AMPHARES.
MagifRrates of Sparta!

This painful work of neceflary justice
Will quickly end the troubles of the slate.
LEOSIDAS, who owes his crown to you, -
Your faithful zeal and service will reward.

[Exeunt Ephori.

.[Manet

[Manet AMPHARES and the Spartan who entered uib

AcGs.]

AMPHARES.

Halle to the Thracian captain, and require him
To fend his prisoner LYSAND E R hither. {Exit Spartan,
AGIS remov'd, and turbulent LYSANDER,
Like snow along the shore, their army melts.

Enter Meffnger from the dungeon,

MESSENGER.

The executioners refuse theiroffice:
Sacred they hold the person of a king,
A Spartan-king descended from the Gods.

AMPHARES.

Again those fables of the villain priests
Rife up to thwart me. Now, my truity servant,
Approve thy faith, and win my ladling favour.
Each inltant of delay is big with peril
Whilst AG is lives.' Let thy good sword fulfil
The sentence of the law, and thy own tongue
Shall name the recompense.

MESSENGER..

Shall it, my lord?

I am your initrdment, and bind myself'
By this bold deed ftiil faster to your fortunes. [Exit.

AMPHARES.

Ye sons of bold ambition, learn of me:
Trust not the survey of another's eye:
Your dangerousvoyage needs a pilot's care
Who never quits the helm.

Enter

Enter SPARTAN,

SPARTAN.

We are betray'l
LYSA NDER-

AMPHARES.
What of him? Speak-faulter not.

SPARTAN.
Is fed.

A MPHA'RES.
Whither ? With whom ?-Eternal Gods!:

SPARTAN.

The guards have let him free, :he open gates
1fr, and ent'ring fearch'd the empty tower.

AMHPHARES.

That traitor Exrxvs !-Now let me resolve
And quiclly too.

SPARTAN.

The people are alarm'd,
A'l gather to their tribes.

AMPHARES.

CurIt be their tribes.

The deed is done already. Yet I have
One pledge of value.

SPARTAN.
AGES IST gATA.-,

AMPHARES.

This hour file dies. I've sent a trufly slave
To end her woes. But the Athenian maid,

I I-IHer

Her I'll bear off in spite of frowning fortune.
Go to the turret, and conduc her hither. [Exit Spartan,

Manet AMPHARES.

Malignant powers ! or blind unerring Safe,
This is your work: now you afiert your empire,

Enter MESSENGER.

My lord, the troops of Euxus have revolted.
RHINALCES visited this night each pori
And near Amycla's gate, ome Thracians met,
Whose leader, quefiion'd, anfwer'd with his sword.

AM-PH ARES.
By heaven and earth, LYSANDER !-Ha! proceed.

MESSENGER.

The sudden onset, and the cloud of night
The traitors favour'd; some efcap'd our fwor;!,
But many more in the sharp combat fell.

AMPHARES.
Did their fierce leader fall ?

MESSENGER.

Above the reft

Conspicuous he fought; at him each sword
Was pointed. If he fell not on the spot,
Sure he receiv'd wounds that.muft fatal prove.

- AMPHARES..

Confirm me that, and I will mock at fate.
Command my troops, that in the Forum watch,
To join RHINALCES. I myself will follow.

[Exit MESSENGER.

ntir1

Enter EUANTHE.

How beautiful {he is ! Should he survive,
Those charms divine he never Shall enjoy.

EUANTHE.

Why haft thou call'd me hither to affli&
And torture me with fpeaacles of woe ?

The Gate of the Prison opens, and

AMPHARPES' Slave advances.

Eternal powers ! why yawn yon dreadful gates ?
And from what horrid deed fialks yonder villain ?

MESSENGER.
Thy orders are obey'd. He lives no more.

EUANTHE.

Barbarian monfier! haft thou kill'd LYSANDER ?-
But I will not reproach thee, nor complain
To the regardless Gods. My doom is pat;
There is one only refuge for EUANTHE.
Once more I follow where LYSANDER leads,
Where murder and AMPHARES cannot come;
To part us more.

She runs toward the dungeon.

-AMPHARES/fiZeS her.

AMPHARES.

Some other season choose.

There is no leisure now for lamentation.
Forthwith conduit her to the Arcadian gate:
There with the-horfemen wait,

I 2 Enr

Enter MESS NGER.

MESSSEN.GER.

My Lord, my Lord,
The royal bandby Thracian Euxus led-

.(Shout.)

AMPHARES.

My enemy prevails.-This way with me.
My steps pursue, or by the Gods of Hell !-

EUAlT.HE.

I will not leave this place. Draw forth thy sword,.
And try if death can terrify despair.

AMPHARES.
Prag her along. (Shout.)

Again !-the foe.draws near.

(Sh. iut fotm the oterfidt,

AG Is and Libe ty.)

AMPHAR ES.
I am encompaP; yet I'l1 mar their triumph.

Runs at EUANTHE' Uiti'i hisfiord

Enter LYSANDER followed .by RiESUS.,

Infernal dog, turn and behold LYSANDER.
Fly,R E s us,to the king. Traitoraccurft!ExitRHESus
Down, down, to Tartarus; there villain, howl.

JAMPHARESJaIII

EUANTHE.
Amazingpowersi alive4 vi&orious! Oh!

LYSANDER.

And have T come to save thee, 0 EUANTHE !
But oh ! I fear, I come too late for AcGs.

Thedungeon-mouth is open. : Erter RESUS., -

Tell.me, RHEsus-

RHESUS.,
The king is nlurder'd, in yon vault he lies.

LY-SANDER.

My prince! my friend! thy goodness, and thy virtue,
Thyciemency, thy mildness, have undorne thee!
Fatal to Nations is the dread example r
Hence monarchs, who with iron sceptre rule,
*'Will jutify their treatment of mankind;
And virtuous princes, born in evil times,.
Will hesitate to flem corruption's tide,
Left they Ihould be like AGIs overwhelmr'd

AMPHARES.

He who preferr'd LYSANDER to AfPIHARES,.
nas paid me with his life. My dying hand
Hath sow'd the feeds ofdiffeord and diftraaion. -
Peace ne'er fliall dwell iri Sparta. Plag-es on plagues
Shall rife'to curse you, as--' (Dies.)

LYSANDER.

Thy foul is curst'.. - -

There the fell spirit of AMPHARES fled
Inimprecations. Prophet ofdifafters,
Upon the dismal banks of Acheron,
Amidst the wailing gholls, trill curse thy.country;,
And end a speech the damn'd will hate to hear.
lehold the mother of our murder'd king.

Enter AGESISTRATA aid Euxus,

AGESISTRATA.
Alas! Ineed not alk the fate of AcGI -

1 3 You

Your looks, your silence fay, I have no son 1
Yet speak to me, for I can hear the worf,
1 have been long familiar with afflieion; .
I am the widow of the fire of AGIS. '

LYSANDER.

There lies the bloody author of his death
Slain by my hand.

AGESISTRATA.
-Alas! alas ! my son!

Oft has my anxious mind this hour foreseen,
And warn'd thee oft. But thou the danger fcorn'd,
When Sparta's glory was the price of peril.
0 ! son of Jove, great author of our race,
Suflain my foul. For he who was my flay,
My comfort, and my itrength, is now no more.
Yet in the path his generous fpirit.chofe,
He fell; and conscious virte.crown'd his fall

LYSANDER.
So fell not false AMFHARES.

Euxu s.

And SANDANE.

LYSANDER.
SANDANE deadI

Euxus. -

And dreadful was her death.

She fled, for refuge from the people's rage,
To the fame turret where AMPiHARES' troops
Guarded the queen, whose mantleon the ground
She spied, and wrapt it round her wretched head;

When

When suddenly a flern assassin came,
And flabb'd ler, as that queen whose robe {he wore.
Arriving then, I heard her shriek for help,
Implore her country's Gods, with bitter cries,
And, in her agony, divulge her crimes.
It was no wonder that flie sear'd to die.

AGESISTRATA.

0 guilt ! thou'rt worlt of all; he knew thee not,
For whom I mourn. Untimely was his fate;
Yet full of high and pleating thoughts he fell.
Great-hearted Virtue, in its swelling hour,
Scarce feels the blow that itrikes at brittle life.
The painful part is mine, in grief to live.
Would I had dy'd for thee, my on ! my son i

EUANTHE.

EUANTHE'S tears Shall ever flow with yours,
For her protetor and her gentle friend.
Mysterious are the counsels of the Gods;
Together AG IS and AMPHARES fall.

LYSANDER.

The son of AcGI lives, his infant years
Require a mother's care. Without delay
Proclaim the son of AGIS king of Sparta.
To him, the offspring of my prince ador'd,
Descend the love and faith I bore to AGIS.
Ye generous Thracians, who this day have ihewn
The matchless worth and honour of your ninds,
Henceforth be Spartans. And, ye Spartan youths,
Whom AcIS lov'd, and for whose rights he died,

I 4 Display

Display the fplrit of your dear-bought freedom;
With grateful valour guard the hero's son,
And prove that AGis perifh'd not in vain..

AGESISTRATA.
Condua me, Spartans, to his dear remains.

LYSANDER.
Forbear a while yon dismal vault-Enter MESSENCEi

MESSENGEIR.

My Lord,

The people, headed by the priests of Jove
And Hercules, in long proceflion come,
Bearing the body of their royal lord,
From that base dungeon to the fculptur'd tomb
Which guards the sacred duff of Sparta's kings.

Enter the Proceffio witk

the Body of AGi,

LYSA NDE.R..
0 Destiny supreme !

EUAN'THE.
O fad remains of youth and majetty!

AG.ESI S.TRATA.

My son! my son!

Nature is thwarted here; thou fhouldt have borne
Thy aged parent to the silent tomb.

CHORUS.

Mourn, ye sons of Sparta, mourn,
Four the fad lamenting firain. Wrete

Wretched people ! Land, forlorn !.
Mourn the best of princes slain,-

Priest of. JUPITER ...

He fell not as the warrior falls,
Whose breait defends his native walls.-
Td treason AGIs bow'dliis head,.
And'by his guilty fubjeds bled : ..
Betray'd by those his mercy spar'd;;'
Ingratitude was his.reward..

C H:O R.U S..

Shame is mix'd with.Sparta's. woe,.
Blood of kings the city stains.
Ever let our sorrows flow,
Shame indelible remains.

Prief'of JUPITER

Yet Acis triumph'd in his fall;;
For Virtue triumphs-over all! .
Great, superior to his fate,.
He only- griev'd for Sparta's. tate.-
When Jove decrees-a nation's doomi,
He calls their heroes to the tomb..
Fearless they fall, immortal rife,
And claim the freedom of the Ikies.

C'H-O PRU S..

AGIs triumph'd in his fall, .
Virtue triumphs over all '
Such a king shall rie'er return :
®ur country and ourselves we mourr;-

Ir.5.

' Prieof HERCULES.

A'GI fell, by fraud o'ercpn e;
Alike was great'Alcides' doom:
Y& then most we-thy. of his fire,
The son of JovE, when wrapt in firei
:Vi&orious crown'd his labours past:
His noblest labour was the last.

CHORUS of all.

Now in peace our hero lies,
Ceas'd his toil, his race is run;
Freedom is the glorious prize
AGIs for his people won.

F I N I S.

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mrs. PRITCHARD.

EP I L 0 G U E.

Spoken by Mrs. PR1TCH ARD.

d King in bloom #ofyouth,,for freedom die!

Outr ard, tho' bold, durJf not have foar'dof high.

sis is no credulous admiring age;
Butfacredfitre thefaith of Plutarch's page.
Inf/iipleJlile that antientfage relates
Te tale of Sparta, chief of Grecian Jlates:
Eight hundred years itfouriJh'd, great in arms,
On dangers rose, and grew amidfi alarms.
Of Sparta's triumph you have heard the cause,
AMoref/rong, more noble than Lycurgus' laws ;
Hn.u Spartan Dames, by glory's charms infpir'd,,
Thefin, the lover, and the hulfiandfir'd.
2lefair of Britain's iJle, which jufily clainms
The Grecian title, land of lovely dames,
In Britain's caie, exertyour matchless charm's,
nd roife your lovers, to the love of arms.
Hid, not extint, thefpark of valour lies;
nor breath Jhall raise it flaming to the Jfiesi.
h'ou Mars his bloody hanner hangs in air,
'd bids Britannia's on sons r .war prepare '

16 Eet

Let each lov'd maid, each mother, bring the /iehd;.
.nd arm their couniry's chatmpionfor the field.
Arm'd and iylam'd, each Briti#h breafiall burn,.
No yuth aunaurel.'d./all toyou return.
Then /hall we cease t'exult at trophies 'won,.
In glory's field, by Heroes-not our own.
.rane yet F all tremble at the Britih s/word4.
4nd dread the Yengeance of her antient. Lord,,

T H E
THE
Siege of A Q UI L E At.

A
T R A G E DY.

As it is A. T E D at the
THEAT R E-R O Y A i.

Il N,
D R R Y--L. A N E;.

--Me non oracula certum
Sedtors certafacit, pavido, frtifae cadendum -eflr

I.-U.
CA.K._

# PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.

P'R L 0 G-U E;

Spoken by Mr. G A RR I c K.
,TjHE N Philip's son ledforth his warlike band,

To die, or conquer, in a diJiant land;

[o fan thefire, a martial muse he chose;
From Homer's ong a new Achilles rose !
lWhn generous Athens her prime trophies won,,
?anqulijh'd Darius, and Darius'fon,
Iheftage breath'd war- thq fldier's hb/om bhun'd,
Andfircer to thefield each chief return'd:
Nolw, when the zvorld resounds with loud alarnms
When wvitory fits plum'd on Britain's arms,
Be war our theme: the hero's glorious toil,
And virtue springing from the iron foil!
Our scenes prefient a siege in flory known;
Where magnanimity and valiur Fhne:
If nature guides us, if the hand of truth
Draws thejuft portrait of a Roman youth,
Who, with the heif and noblest pafionisfr'd,
In thefame moment conquer'd and expir'd;
Perhaps your hearts may own the pitur'd woe,
Andfrom afonderfoourceyourforrows fjow ;
lWhilf warm remembrance aids the poet's firain,
And England weeps for English heroesJlain.

DRA.

# DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

DRAMATIS PERSOóNAE;

M E N..;

L Consul of Rome, and .) G

AMILlUSy, I Governor ofAquileia. S

PAULUSl Sons of die Consul l Mr. AUSTND.
TITUS, . Mr. HOLLAND.

VARUS, OflicersintheArmy-l Mr. DAvIES;.
DUMNORIX, elfMAXIMIN. SMr.BRANSBY.

AGNumidian Officer inMr. SRASE.

GA.RTHA,. theTroops ofM LEMI IUs. CRAS'

Priest of JUPITER,. Mr..BURTON.

Lucius, a Freedman, lir. PACKER.
OFF.ICER, aMeffenger,. Mr. ACKMANi

W M' E N.
eoRNEIA,-.Wife to'the Conswrl,-· ·Mrs. GmBEAQ.

# THE Siege of AQUILEIA: A TRAGEDY.

THE
Siege of AQUILEIA:

A
TRAGEDY.

ACT I;

T'e Patace Coitrt.
Enter PAULUS and TITUS.

PAULUS.

H I S. is no time to firive for vain renowni
The fate of Rome, remember that, my brother!
Depends on the defence of Aquileia.

TITUS.
PAULUS, I know.

P-AULUS.
But thou dost not confider
Th'importance of this war. We fight not now,.

As.

As oft since Freedom fell our fathers fought,
When Latian chiefs contended who Ihould reign,
With half the senate lifted on each fide;
The vitor still was Roman, and. rever'd
The gods and temples of immortal Rome.
But o'er yon mighty host that guards our walls,
Fierce MAXIMIN commands; whether of Thrace,
Or wild Dalmatia, so obscure his birth,
Himself scarce knows; but sure Barbarian born.
This savage soldier, nurs'd in blood and war,,'
Whom military frenzy hath set.up
*To trampleon mankind, abhors a Roman;
And marks for death the noble and the brave.
His yoke, at lat, th' indignant senate scorns,
The flumb'ring Genius of our country wakes,
And rouses slothful Italy to arms.
The furious tyrant from the frontier haftes,
Like a wild beast gall'd by the hunter's spear,
And, breathing vengeance, rushes upon Rome:
Here first oppos'd, tenfold his fiury burns;
Here, in the pass of fate, our father sands,
Defies and flops the monster in his rage,
Till Rome's last legions come to give him battle.
Now, when a soldier's life is of such moment,
When deltiny hangs on a tingle day,
To fight for glory, TITUs, were a crime,

TITUS.

No,PAULUs, no it is not fame alone
That TITUS seeks to purchase from, the foe; Th

Iw

'ho' such a crime the gods-and men would-pardon,
I know the peril that o'er Rome impends, \
And know the hated cause of all our ills,
That army, only brave againif their country, - -
I mean to smite them, and their giant leader,
Whom nature for a gladiator form'd,
To be the sport, and not the lord, of Rome.
Theblow'once struck, our foe mufl raise the siege,
Or wake his veterans in vain attacks,
And give to .GORDIANUS easy conqcuet.

PAULUS.

Were this a frontier city far from Romet
And yon huge host compos'd of foes remote,
German, or Parthian; I would fay to thee,
Lead on, my brother! Shield to, ihield we'd go,
And fire yon turret, or together perish.
But now when conquest by delay is gain'd,
When Aquileia guards the walls of Rome,
Dread of the great event has 'o possess'd me,
That,.like the Persian soldier, I could flay
My arm uplifted, patient to the call
Of cautious Duty.

TITUS.
And renouncing Fame ?

Oh! PAULUS ! you have gain'd long since the prize
That I contend for. Every martial palm
Thy fivord hath won. When I, like thee, am great
In deeds of arms, like thee 1 may be wary.
Now to my brother 1 lay bare- my breast:

This

This famous siege approaches to its end;
Whatever end the ruling gods ordain,-
Yet no diftinguifh'd ation graces me.
I've done my duty. That I reckon nothing;
The meanest soldier has not shrunk from duty;
Son of ,EMILI us, and thy brother,. PAULus
I mud do more, and by the gods I will!
Here I have found a path that leads to glory;
Do not oppose me, elfe-we're friends no more.-
Our father comes. Speak not againt my purpose,
And I ihall move the consul's noble mind.

Enter .EMILIUS.

. MILIUS.
Health to my sons I

PAUL.US andTIT's.

Heaven guard our fither's life!
.EMILIUS.. "

And bless my children! ha! your looks:are keen.
Your's chiefly, T Tus ! what, hath irr'd your iirit?
How points the enemy? This q.uiet night,.
In preparation patl, portends a storm.

PAULUS.

On that attack which threats the eastern gate
The enemy hath labour'd all night long,
Repairing what the river's rage had ruin'd.

JEMILIUS.

It was a friendly flood. The river god
Wiith.all his waters guards his native walls;.

On that frong quarter they can ne'er prevail.
The north I fear, where yon flupendous tower
Our works commands.

TITUS.

It thall not long command,
Let bat the consul grant me my desire.

2EMILI US.
What would my son ?

TITUS.
Their tower is weakly guarded.

At break of day, a soldier from yon camp
Fled to my poll; hollow and gaunt he was;
His flirivell'd limbs scarce bore his founding arms.
:Like him, he said, with toil and famine worn,
Were half the tyrant's hot. For MAXIMIN,,
Mad with delay, and fiercer from repulse,
Revileshis soldiers, drives them to the trench
With whips and (harp reproach. This day, o'ercome
By strong neceflity, he breathes a while,
And fends his legions forth, to gather in
Whatever this exhaufed region yields.
I saw the busy foragers in troops
March, and disperse themselves on every fide,
Likeplayful children on a summer day,
Secure and careless; for no martial band
Of late hath sallied from our guarded gates.
This is the time. Permit me, 0 my father!
Now to attack their ill defended lines,
And fire that mighty tower in which they trust.

7 .iEAr-

AEMILIUS.

Well haft thou spoke, my son ! thy zeal J love,
Nor mufl thy itill and judgment pass unprais'd. ·
Be thus attentive Rtill, and tfuft me, TITUS,
In future sieges, and in other wars,
Swift execution Thall thy purpose honour.

TITUS.'

Ne'er shall I fee another siege like this,
Ne'er draw my sword in such a glorious cause.
Alas! my lord! check not my spring of thought,
Nor nip the only bud it yet has borne.

irMILIVS. '

Riper occasions will thy valour claim...
Danger comes on; Typhweus-Iike it comes,
Whose fabled flature every hour encreas'd.

TITUS.

0 ! judge not of the counsel by the weight
Of him that gives it. Would to heaven, mylord!
That I could now divest me of that youth
Which mars my credit. Chearfully I'd ftep
Far into age, to gain hut for a day
The grave authority-which years bellow.

PAULUS.,
What brings'the brave Numidian GARTHA hither? i

Enter GART9HA.

GARTHA. .
Hail to the general-

8 - . EMl-.

EMILIUS.
Hail, valiant GARTHA !
How has the morning pat where you command?

GA.RTHA.

It hasbeenbufy. The presumptuous foe
Inlocfe diforder'd squadrons rang'd the fields.
Iwatch'd the time; and iudden as the blaf
That rifes in the defart, out we rufl'd
And swept them from the plain. Safe in our speed
Wle urg'd the chace'far as the riling ground,
And unmolested view'd the camp below.
This worthy of your notice I obferv'd,
Their wond'rous tower, the work of many a day,-
Stands now protected by a feeble guard.

TInTus.

Thanks fdr thy welcome tidings, noble GARTHA !
The guardian gods of Rome bend from their skies,
And point this action out. Hear me, my father!
If ever since my birth I gave thee joy,
If e'er thou did'ft, as parents oft are wont,
Interpret large the promise of my childhood,
Oh'ear and grant my chief and dear request !
Letme go forth: be this my firil exploit,
To wrap in fire the tyrant's boasted tower;
That Rome, who glories in the .Emilian line,
Mayjoin your TITUS to his kindred names!

./EMILIUS.

In thee the spirit of thy fathers speaks,
Or some superior power thy bosom fires,

Whom

Whom I oppose no more. Go, and fulfil
Thy destiny. Brave GA R THA too hall add
His troops to thine. Prepare what else--- -

, T'TITUs.

'Tis done.

DefRruaive intruments and balls.of fire
Are ready at the gate.

JEMILIVs.

Farewel, myr son!

If you prevail, urge not too far your fortune.
Remember fRill my words; that when we meet,
I may have cause to praise thy condut then,
As now thy courage, TITUS.

TITUS.

GARTHA, come!

[Exeunt TITUS and GARTHA,

.EMILIUS.

PAULUs, lead thou thy legion to the gate,
And favour their retreat. It may be needful;
But mix not in the fight; for mighty cities
Have been by such temerity furpriz'd.

PAULUS.

Would that there was no Roman breast more prone
To rash attempts, than mine ! I wiih, my lord,
That I had led, and TITUS had fuftain'd me.

Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

Consul of Rome! this arrow, thus infcrib'd,
Fell onthe green flop'd bank, fast by my pott;

And

And as it bears your name, myself have brought it.

[.EMILIUS readst-'

"In three days hence, even with the ides of June,
" The Roman army comes to your relief.
"Befparing of your troops; protract the siege;
" Thou art the shield of Rome and Go RDIANUS."

.EMILI S.

Soldier,return, and publilh to the legions
The welcome tidings of a.near relief.'

OFFICER.

Gladly, my lord. Much have the troops endur'd,
And with unihaken conlancy they susser.

Exit OFF-ICEl .

PAULUS.

Had this advice arriv'd ere TITUS went,
I think he hardly had obtain'd perniflion.
Tho' MAXIMIN thould raile an hundred towvers,
For three short days his fury we may corn,.

JEMILIUs.

Go, and prevent the sally. Tell thy brother,
What the imperial mandate here contains"
Itis the emperor's command recalls him.

PAULUS.
With pleasure I obey.

[Exit PAULUS$ ..
dEMILIUS alone,

I mu iteferve
tiy sons, my soldiers, for.a nobler service,

K· -a

And. in the battle aid the Roman arms.
The hour approaches, that mull give to Rome
A legal lord, by her own suffrage chosen,
Or fix a barb'rous mailer o'er mankind.
That barb'rous malfer 1 ihall never own.
If I could sloop to drag the servile chain,
And leave the vassal of a vile Dalmatian,
Yet I could not conceal me in the croud
Ofprofrate Romans; I that flood aloft,
And bore thro' Italy the senate's standard.
Fait by that standard will I plant my foot,
There with my boys a glorious conquest gain,
Or end at once the long JEmilian line.

* CORNELIA aprcals.

Behold the only moment that can fliake:
One moment my refolvc! What will become
Of thee, CORNELIA ! doom'd perhaps to live,
Like PRIAM'S wretched queen, the slave of those
By whom her sons, her husband, country fell.

Enter CORNELIA and PRIEST.

CORNE LIA.
Why is my lord alone ? Where are my sons ?

_MILIUS.

This day, CORNELIA, brings us welcome tidings,
The Emperor approaches with his holt.

CORNELIA.
Thanks to the gods ! But fay, where are my children ?

AIII

JEMILlUS. :- .
Thisinlant I expect them to. return. '

.CORNELIA.

romi whence, .'MILIUS .
?

.EMILIUS.

From the northern gate.

TITUS had form'd a brave, a great design;
But when assurance of relief arriv'd,
My PAULUS hallen'd to recal his brother.

- CORNELIA.

Tisaslfear'd. PAULUS will come too late.
The omens of the gods must be fulfill'd.

jEM ILIUS.
WLhat evil orhens has CORNEL IA seen ?

CORNELIA.

'risltrange to'tell ;but as Iflumb'ring lay,
About that hour when glad Aurora springs,
To chace the lagging (hades, methought I was
loRome, and full of peace the city feem'd.
hMymind oblivious too had loft its care.
Srene I ftep'd along the lofty hall,
Embellilh'd with the statues of our fathers,
When suddenly an universal groan
liued at once from every marble breast.
Agha I gaz'd around ! when slowly down
From their high pedestals I saw descend
Themurder'd GR ACCH . Hand in hand, the brothers
Stlk'd towards me. 'As they approach'd more near,
Theywere no more the GRA CCHI,' but my sons

K.z2 PAULUS

PAULUS and TITus. At that dreadful change
I fhriek'dand wak'd. But never from my mind
Thefpetacle hall part. Their rueful eyes!
Their cheeks of lone! the look of death and woe!
So strange a vision ne'er from fancy rose.
The reft, my lord! this holy Priest can tell.

3EMILIUS.

Why this is nothing but a common dream;
For often when the waking mind'is charg'd '
With apprehension of uncertain ills,
Imagination, in the hour of reft,
Prefenteth wild fantaf-ic combinations,
That have a shade and tinxture ofthe.paRt:
But 'tis the weakneifsof the humaq mind
That joins the vain affemlage t9 futurit.

PRI EST.

Men reason thus, my lord ! who think their reason
Can grasp and measure all; presumptuous thought!
Sounds more than human hayvebeen often heard,
And shapes celestial seen, by mortal man;
But yet moit frequent. inthe silent night
Are warnings given'by strange portentuous dreams.
The history of mighty Rome abounds
In awful instances. The old republic
By them has oft been fway'd, and oft preferv'd,

JM.I I lUS.

But tell me, Priest of Joy E! what do the gods
By their more certain omens now dedlag

PRIrST.

PRIEST.

Consul! with the mos trvenerable rites
That our religion knows, I have perform'd
A sacrifice to Capitolian Jove,
This pious matron present: never yet
Since at the altars of the gods I flood
Did I behold such omens of calamity.
Yet they were intricate, ambiguous, dark;
And tho' some parts I might interpretfair,
Even these \vere mix'd and full of dire perplexity.
No further can I fee into the cloud,
That veils the will of heaven; but this I fay,
And by the fceptYe of the god .I serve
Itis the truth: Some dreadful danger hangs
O'er thee thyself, this city, or thy race.

(Shtout.j

CORNELIA.
Ha! what means that shout ?

.-EM-I LIV S.

It is a joyful fhou,

Behold the cause: fee where that dusky smoke
Darkens the air. And nowthe flameburfts out -
Their turret blazes, and my TITUS conquers.

CORN ELIA.

O heaven and earth ! 0 son too well belov'd f
Why do there cruel omens check my joy ?

K 3, £stJ.

/

Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

"Consul! your valiant son hath sir'd the tower;
But whilst he urg'd too far the flying foe,
A band, that lay conceal'd beyond the height,
Has gain'd the plain between him and the city.

EMILIUS.'

0 rashly brave! whom I forewarn'd in vain.--
Retire, CORNELIA, yet he may be refcu'd.
Lucius.

Enter another OFFICER.

Lucius.

The northern gate unguarded ,tands

For when brave PAULUS saw his brother's peril,
He with his legion rufh'd upon the foe,
And furious is the fight.

CORNELIA.

Both, both areloRt!

-imLilus. '
-JEMIItlIUS

Unhappyyouths! my teady PAULUS too!
Where is our discipline, obedience where ?-
I have no leisure now for words, CORNELIA !
Implore the gods to guard you and your children.

[Exit with his altendatls.

Manieni

Manent CORNELIA,. and PRI EST.

'CORNELIA.

Perhaps ere this CORNELIA has no children
They both are fallen into the fatal snare.
Tremendous oracle ! too late reveal'd. -

PRIEST.

Abandon not thy foul to such despair;
The sword of war, devouring as it is,
Consumes not all. The defin'd number die,
And from the bloodiest field still some return.

CORNELIA.

My sons will ne'er return, I knowv them well.
The noble heart of TiTus; if he lives,
This infant swells with grief, and pride, and shame.
Will he, the author of this fatal combat,
Forsake the soldiers whom he led to slaughter;
Return discomfited, and fav'd by flight,
To bear reproach, and blu(h in Aquileia ?
Hewill inot, holyFlamen 1 Nor will PAULUS:
Calm as he is, and master of himself,
My generous PAULUS will not leave his brother.
Alas ! I never shall behold them more:
This is the evil that the gods foretold.
Ye conlfant matrons of Rome's former days t
Alas! I have no fortitude like yours.
Mine were no public cares. In the mild shade
Of sweet domestic happiness I liv'd,.

K + Till

Till this fierce tempefl rose, the tlqrm of war,
Whose rage hath buifr' on the AEmilian race.

P.R IE-ST

Lady, retire.' I to.the.walls will:go,
And learn what has befallen. Reftember thou,
How oft, in human life, the great conclusion
'Offeard and wiih'd events mocks all conjeture.

[Ea-i.
Th:i End of She FIRST ACT.

Ac T
x ~ ~ ~ ^C.

ACT IL

Enter PRIEST;

PRIEST;.

T O soon thy omens are accomplilh'd, JOVE-!
1 0 wretched parents ! 0 devoted race I:

Enter LUCI s:.

LuciyUs..
CORNELIA comes,. impatient of thy flay..

PRIEST.

How shall my tongue perform a'faithful office,.
And tell Co RNE L A what my eyes beheld :
Her sons I saw surrounded by the foe;
And their finll troops feem'd like a bank of aiidj.
Which,. by the flowing tide encomipafs'd round,,.
Each moment waftes and lessens to the view.
Their wretched. father saw, and could not save them,:·
For full oppos'd.to him the.tyrant.ftood.
With half his holt embattled. Thrice EMIWi. '
Came to the front of his renaiaing troopss '-
Asif he meant torufh upon the foe,.
And. thrice the consul pull'd the father. backs

- K. 5 Ti»»

Then looking down and leaning on-his'sivord,
- The tears fast trickling down the warridr's cheeks,
He paus'd a while, andturn'dhim to the city.

Enter CORNELIA.

CORNELIA.

Thou bring'ft no comfort! Terror and dismay
Are written on thy brow ! Haftee; tell me, Flamen.

. RIEST.
'Behold a soldier bleeding from the field.

Enter'GARTHA wounded.

CORNELIA.
'Tis the Numidian chief!-

.GARTHA.

Lady, these wounds,

Which bleed to death, make GARTHA not ahlam'd
That he alone revisits Aquileia.
Involuntary messenger am I '
Of tidings harflh to tell. 'My fiery iteed,
Gall'd-with an arrow, bore me from the plain,
Where frill your valiant sons maintain the fight,
And with amazing ations fate suspend.
The boldest soldiers of the tyrant's hd6 .
Shrink from their rage. Lady, I speak with pain.
This to the cpnful. I advis'dthe sally,

And

And fell into the ambush; I: rejoice,
That I hall not survive it--

PRIEST.

Help! he faints.

GARTHA.
Oh! would Ihad-fallen at'the feet of TITUS !

[Enter Attendant:.

PRIEST.
Support, and bear him hence. * '-.

CORNELIA.

0 generous GAR THA !
Too dearly haft thou provd thy confant faith... -

[Exit GA RTHA Iupported.

No more I hear the fhoutsof distant war,
'Tis horrid silence all. Thework of death
Is over. Doubt and fear are at an end.
Now certain anguish and despair prevail.

Enter EMILIUS attended.

CORNELIA.
My husband !

EM:ILIUS.

Oh! CORNELIA! wretched;dameC!

Look not to me; I bring no consolation,
I cannot comfort-thee. I could not save -
My children from deflrucioni . Rigid duty.
Made me fpetator of their dverthrow.
0 fatal ensigns of unhappy power !i

. K6 .- ' had

O had .EMILIUS been:a:poor Centurion,- -
He might unheeded have forsook his flation,.
And perifh'd with his children.

CORNELIA.

. .- They are dead .

PAtULUS and TITUS dead. Their mother lives:-
*Ye all-directing gods, wh'om we adore,
Whom I with spotless hands have ever serv'd,
Is misery like this my juft:rewar ? ' . .
Your dearest gifts are to defiruifon turn'd.
Had I not been the fond, the-happy mother
Of sons, for whom all ,mothers envy'd me,
'I'had,riot been above allwomen wretched.

PRIEST.

Great are thy woes, CORNEL IA, greatindeed t
Yet not unfrequient in this changeful world
Ate woes like thine; and greater itil than thine..
The famous matronof.thy name and blood,
The first CORNELIA, fiW hergodlike sons
In Rome betray'd, and slain by:Roman hands,
And oft in every age have wretched m6thera
Surviv'd their families', their country's ruin,
And liv'd fadcaptives.in a foreign land:
No kindred ear to:hear, 'o eye to we'el. - '
'It pity of their woes: no human l.te
For them to look on, but the hateful face
Of foes, who: made:them dhildlefst -widows, -flvesi
To theeremain thy. huband, and thy:country. .:.
:Iiwhofe defence thy sons £S greatly died.

Th*t

Thee Rome shall honour, and revere in thee,
The sacred memory of her heroes slain.

JEMILIUS. -

It is the right, the birthright, of our house,
For Rome to die: in every signal strife,
In every Rruggling period of the Rate,
My fires have bled. My sons have chose their time.;:
Bravely they fought, and nobly were they slain.
Rome Rill fnall sand, tho' the AMILII fall.
The tyrant's works are levell'd-with the ground,.
And his proud tower yet smokes upon the plain.
Our ramparts now his fierce assaults defy;
The Roman army, like. a gather'd storm,
Rolls towards him. My sons fhall'.be reveng'd;
My eyes shall fee, nmyfword ihall share, the vengeance

CORNELIA.

Mean while, unburied on the bloody field, -
Amidst the common heap, my children lie.
Majestic PA U LUS, and my lovely TtTUS,.
Is this the end of all your mother's care ?
Some fierce barbarian now insults the dead;
Adding'difhoneft wounds. O.! might not golii
Their dear remains redeem.? Alas ! alas!
'Tis the sole consolation. I can hope for;
To save them from the beads and birds of prey,, .
That howl and fcream.around' these fatal walls :
To fold once more their bodies in.my arms;
To lay them decent-on the funeral-pile,
And o'er their ashes pour- a parent's heart. '

'
* JEM.IIHIS», Lr~

.EMILIUS.

Mindful of that fad duty, I sent forth
A herald to the tyrant, and expet
Each moment his return. The trumpet founds.

(Enter. Herald, with an Off.

Per of M'AXIMIN'S.)

'Tis he, and with him one whose lofty port,
And splendid arms, bespeak 'his high command.'

CORNELIA;

Forgive, 0 chief unknowin, a mother's grief,
Which, fhort'ning the relpe& thy pretence claims)
Haftes to enquire, if MAXIM IN will give
The bodies of her children to the tomb ?

OFFICER.

Far be its dismal honours from. your offspring r
Lady, your valiant sons survive the field'.

CORNELIA.

Are they not dead ? were not the SEMIut flaini
On yonder field ? Their father saw them fall.

OFFICER. '

Faint with long fighting, and encompaft round,
Oppreft with numbers, and born down they fell;
Not slain, nor greatly wounded... Captives-now,'
-In their behalf, from MAXIMIN I.come.

CORNELIA.

0! fire of gods and men !. eternal JOvE !
For ever prais'd be thy protecing arm I

; - OFFICER.

Upon their father now depends their fate:
'Tis his to grant what .MAxlMIN requires.

COR NELIA1

.CORNELIA.

Let his demands be boundlefs.as the with
Of avarice itself, they Ihall be granted.
Treasures there are from age to-age preferv'd,
The acquisition of our frugal fires;
Well are the treasures of our house beftow'd,
If they redeem their.lives who- hould poffefs.them.

OFFICER.

It is not gold that MAXIMIN requires.
To thee; 'EMIL us, I address my words
Imperial MAX IMI , lord of mankind,
Charges the senate and the Roman Feople
With breach of vows, and unprovok'd rebellion;
But chiefly thee, who first withflood thy lovereign,
And fiopt the progrefs.of his just revenge.
The righteous gods, he faith, to thee averse,
Have made thy sons the captives of his arms;
Them he has doom'd to death, and will this day
The sentence execute, unless their father,
Before the fun hall set, give up the city.

CORNELIA. .

Relentless tyrant! O.all-feeing gods!
How dire a profpea opens to CORNELIA I

.EMILIIUS.

Island not now in equal liss with-MAxiMIN,
Nor mean I hear to plead the cause of Rome:
'Twould but offend thine ear. Yet tell thy lord,
He knows EM ILIUs not, and therefore wrongs him
By this unworthy trial of his faith:

Unhappy,

Unhappy, mot unhappy, he m.ay make me,
But he and fortune cannot make me base.

. OFFICE R.
Is this the answer I must bear to MAXIMfN

JEM.IL IUS.
What other answer could he hope from.me- .

OFFICPleR.
Think of the consequence of this defiance.:

·EM.I LIUVS,

I'll meet it when it comes: now I mutl thinl.-
Of trust repos'd.in me by injur'd Rome.

OFFICER.

Stout are thy words: But will this-prideoffpiit
Suflain thee through the horrors that surround thee ?.
Thy lips have now pronounc'd thy children's doom,
Which executed, as it soon must be,:
Will move the fiernelf foldier-of our camp'
To tender pity. Never yet were seen
So brave a pair as thy unhappy sons';:
Nature on them has pour'd out all her gifts,.
And dreft their virtue in the faitet form,

CORNELIA..

O thou, whose tongue in Roman accehts ipeaks,,
Whose gentle afpe.c'fhews a mind humane!.
Take pity on the most unhappy parents,
That ever bore the name. This fatal.day
Has prov'd too well. the wbrdi of these my sons,.:
'Whom nature, tho' they less dePervyd, would love.

!. soften to the.tyrant this refufal.-i "i

' ~ ~
~~. ,'*~~~~ knowS

I know not what to fay; I have no light,
But that which signal misery confers,
To beg from thee aflifance. If thou haft
At home an anxious mother, or fad spouse,
Who daily trembles for thy noible lfe,
Think of her Ilate, and lifien to Co R N EL-IA,
Whose tongue till now did never plead for favour.

.EMILIUS.

0 generous itranger! our misfortunes touch
Thy manly mind,

OFFrCER.

No stranger I: behold

A Roman, and a friend. Thhis helmet oof
'.ilrap3 COReELIA may remember VARUS.

COR NSBLIA.

VARUS.! my friend !. companhiobi of my youth
0 heavy change of times ! on other terms
In Rome, delightful Rome, we 'wont'to mint.

VARUS.
Moll true, CORNELIA.

CORNELIA.

And is VARUS come

To aid the tyrant's arms against his country ?
Come the fierce herald of his kinsmen's doom ?

VARUS.

With the fame heart, the fame unalter'd mind
To all that e'er he lov'd, is VA Rus come.

NEMILIUS.

Permit me, gallant VAUs ! still to claim
Thy friendfhip,:tho' I sand the tyrant's foe.

VARUS'o

. VARUS.-

.IEMILIUS ! fortune rules the lives of men.
Had I been Consul, and poflefs'd in Rome
Of civil dignity; perhapsElike thee,
I Should have arm'd me in the feinate's cauie;
Whilst thou, a soldier on the dillant frontier,
Perhaps, like me, h'adltfought thy leader's quarrel.
The armies of the north acknowledge MAXIMIN.
I lead the Britili legions to the war:
But moreofthis hereafter. Thou haitheard
My horrid melrage, and haft made such answer
As well becomes a Roman and a consul.

iEMILIUS.

Barbarian as he is- forgive me, VA R u s!
He cannot mean this threat'ning to fulfil,

O ! trust not the humanity of MAXIMI N.
If he's not cruel, why art thou in arms ? ,
Besides, his temper, ever fierce and savage,,
Is now incens'd, enrag'd alinof to madness,.
By the wide walling havock of this day.
His works are levell'd, his bell legions.thin'd,
His nephew ALGAR slain by TIT.US' hand.
In the firfl transport of his furious wrath,
He did devote to the-infernal gods,
And ALGAR'S thade, the pris'ners of'the field,
An old Ligurian, captain of his guards,
Step'd in and interpos'd this crafty counsel -
Your answer I will bear, but give, it colours

That

That may denote the dawning of submission,
And so retard .-

Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

An herald from the camp

Requires the tribune forthwith to return:
Impatient MAXIMIN stands on the plain,
Known by his purple and gigantick stature.

..CORNELIA.

Dreadful'impatience I most inhuman rage !
By the dear fynpathy of Roman blood,
Which in our veins from the fame fountain flows,
Let me entreat thee, VA RuS, to appease
The angry tyrart* pefe,...
Difpos'd to yield all that his honour can.
And if fern MAXIMIN prefersrevenge
To proser'd gold, yet try if wealth can win
His friends and favourites to be more gentle.

VARUS.

He has no friends nor favourites; from fear
His soldiers serve, his officers obey.
I muf be gone, for MAXIMIN brooks not
His orders flighted. Trust my zeal, CORNELIA !
Had I but equal power, your sons were free,
Consul.

.EMILIUS.
Let me conduct thee to the gate,

And

And tell thee, as.we go, what yet'ytemains
Untold of our condition:

Exeunt MILIUS and VARUs.
CORNE LIA . - -

Interpreter of heaven's mysterious will,
Augur rever'd! how -will the evening close
Of this difire'fsul day ? Hafie to repeat
The sacred rites, 'and prove thy 'at divine .

PRIEST. r.

Such is fly prpq6fe, fIoon as Phsbus t'6vs'
From his meridian 'heig}t.' L"dy, my mind
gas ponder'd MAXitMlN's abh6o'id disiani'd.
One only cotife-there is to end'the 'frife,
The dreadfu i'rtie 'of nature and bdf duty,
In great sU/-LiUS' mind; azddrecO6rcile
The children's safety with the father's ibn6ur.

-CORNELIA.'
'Tis that I wifiefor, but of that'de'fpait.

PRIEST.

-The Rosban host, by GORD IAiUS ied,
In three days hence reach Aquileia's walls;
Their near approach to MAXIMI* unknown.
Therefore the consul, without breach of honour,
Without injustice to the Roman fiate,
May stipulate with MAXIMIN, to yield
The city on the fourth returning day;
If not reliev'd. Ere that the chance of war
Raises the siege, or makes resistance vain.

C{ORNELIL.

CORNELIA.

Wife are thy words; and now the dawn of hope
Breaks on my darksome mind. Believe me, pries,
The los, of my dear sons in battle slain,
As once I thought them, was less terrible
Than the dire apprehension of that death
To which the tyrant dooms them; worse to me,
And worse, far worse to them. Alas! my sons!
Uncertain is your fate ! who can-foretel
The savage motions of the tyrant's will?
And yet this counsel seems the only means
Of preservation. Minister of heaven !
Let us retire, and at the altar bow
Of JovE eternal, who thy heart infpir'd.

Exquaxt
ht End of tre SECOND ACT.

ACT

4

A: C I
Enter EMILIUS; and from the other fide of the

- age, Lucius.

Lucius.
T 0 every post and fiation round the wall

Yourordershavebeenborne. Andeach commander
With zeal okey'd-

.AMILIUS.
The soldiers' countenance,
How seems it, Lucius -

Lucius.

Determin'd to the death.

Strong indignation at their leader's fate,
With grief and pity, o'er their visage gleams.;
.But every passion fettles to revenge.

A.MILIUS.

Lucius! 'tis well. See that my steed be led
Accoutr'd to the gate. I know nbt, Lucius,
How soon I may beitride him.

Exit Lucius.
JEMILIUS alone.

This difrefs
Grows heavier every hour: like a green wound,

At
$

At frll I felt it-not; it rankles now.
Would I had lifien'd to the urgent voice
Of nature, when (he call'd me to the field !
Who could have blam'd the paflions of a father ?
If Rome had blam'd me, in the silent tomb
Her voice had not been heard.

Enter CORNELIA.

CORNELIA.

- hy tarries VARUS ?

*.2MILIUS.

He will return, CORNELIA ! doubt not that.
The tyrant knows the' snare in which we're caught,
And to the uttermost will prove our fouls '
Before he breaks it.

CORNELIA.
By the gods infpir'd,

The priest hath found'the means to set us free,'
If you consent,

- E MILIUS.
If I content ? alas !
That doubt implies suspicion of the means.- -

CORNELIA.

Hear me, and judge: capitulate with MAXIMI',
In three days hence to yield up Aquileia,
If not reliev'd. Before that time expires,
The arms of Rome vitorious raise the siege;
Or, if defeated, make refitance vain.

Bend

Bend not thine eye, .EMILius,-dn:the.grondl.
The firiteft law of duty is fulilL'd.
If thou rejet'ft this counsel, I willfay, ..
Not MAXIMIN the tyrant flew my:children,
But their owhi cruel father. .

- .MILIUS.

Oh! -forbear!

My foul is.rack'd; my heart asunder torn.
The eyes of all the world on me are fi'd;
Rome and mankind from me expeet their fate.
I mull confider this applauded counsel,
Ere I embrace.

CORNELIA. -

This.city, is not Rome,

Nor your fnall garrison the.Roman holi.
A part, a little part, a very grain
Of publick interest, in your mind outweighs
Your children, all your children. Oh! AEMILIUS!
Alike the father and the mother bear
The name of parent; but a parent's love,
Lives only in the tender mother's heart.

.EMILUS.
Firit let us learn what answer VARI';. irings.

Enter VARUS,
He comes, and various passions dim,his face.

CORNELIA.
O! VARUS, VARUS I

VARUS,
01 toojuft thy fears .

Of my lov'd kinsmen unhrevok'd the doom!
VARUS hath kneel'd ili vain. Hard as the rocks
Of wild Dalmatia, is the tyrant's heart.
lncens'd at the refilfal which I bore, -
His fury rages like a fire confin'd,
And threatens every quarter. Hear, .EMILIUS,
And tremble'now for Rome, as for thy children!

AEMILIUS.
For Rome?

VARUPS.

The tyrant (lend me patience, Heaven!

To speak with calmness, I who serve him flill)
This day hath vow'd to raze imperial Rome.

EMILIUS.
Barbarian! why?

VARIUS.
To fix his wavering hot,

To glut his legions with the mighty spoil.
Disease and famine prey upon his troops,
And rumour cries; that a relief is near.
The soldiers faint, and murmur at the length
And havock of this siege. The crafty tyrant
With found of trumpet thro' his camp proclaim'd,
Thathe will give the city to be sack'd,
Raze her proud walls, and change'the feat of empire.
The glad Barbarians shouted to the skies,
And mix'd with their applause unheard-of oaths
To die with MAXIMIN.

L EM I.

.EAMI LUS. .
What said. the.Romans ?
VARI/S.

In number few, and fcatter'd thro' the bands,
They griev'd, but carefully fuppi'efl their forrowv,

EMILIUS.

Was there no Roman near enoughto plant
A dagger in the heart of MAX IM IN ?

- VARUS.

Before the tyrant reach the walls of Rome,
That Roman may be found.

EMILIUS.

Above the name
Of god-like SCEvoLA his fame ihall rife.

VARUS.

The righteous gods, whom MAXIMIN Contemnsf
Have in their vengeance urg'd his frantic mind
By this decree to work his own perdition.
Long honour'd Rome ! tho' thou haft lofi so much
Of thy primaeval splendor, still my heart
Thy image.worihips ;- fill for thee I fought,
And from Siluriai to the savage shore
Of Caledonia, I thy trophies rear'd!
And ihall thy soldier draw his sword againfi thee,
Or fland a tame fpeeator of thy fall?
No'! I am thine, devoted, as of old.
Thy darling sons, when firfl thy glory rose.
Nor lhall thy turrets bow, imperial Rome!
Till low in dust the head of VARUs lies..

;.* · .,EniLItUS.

*.EMILIUS.
There spoke a Roman !

CORNELIA; i,

I rejoice to hear

The voice of VARUs thus declare for Rome.
Her distant danger may thy arm avert !
But who defends my sons, -whose sudden fate'
This day decides ?

-VA RUS,
O were it pofible

To gain a Ihort delay ! Time presses me;
For strong in troops and terrible is MAXIMIN,
Nor am I yet prepar'd to rife in arms.
In a few-days-nay, if the Roman hoit
Were near at hand,-

CORNELIA:

My hulband, speak!
' .ZEi.MILIUS.

O! VARUS!.
The fates are merciful. Peruse these lines.

VATRUs.

"In three days hence." Then, tyrant, I hall meetthee.
But what can sheath this day the naked sword ?

.E;MILJt7S.

A truce I'll offer, bind myself by vow
(Nor is the pratice new or firange in war)
Within a certain time to yield the city,
If net reliev'd; the time, this scroll directs,
The fourth revolving day.

L 2 VARUS.

VARUS.

I fee thine aim.

Ere that, the blow is struck by GORDIANUS;
Ere that shall VARUS spread his Roman eagle,
And chace the raven of Dalmatia home.

JMILIUS.
Thou think'ft the tyrant will accept those terms ?

VARUS.

I hold it certain: he can wilh no more;
Unknown to him th'approach of GORDIANUS.
By MARS, the father of the Roman race,
Whose spear omnipotent in battle rules,
My life {hall stand betwixt your sons and death.

CORNELIA.

0 best of friends This is the work of heaven,
Whose awful purposes, unconscious man
Promotes, and fondly thinks he serves his own;
Thus from remotest Britain's frozen ihore
The tyrant to his aid the warrior calls,
Who comes, a weapon in the hand of JovE,
To fnite the proud usurper, and preserve
My children.

./MILIUS.
Yea, his country and mankind..

VARUS.

May the event these pleasing hopes fulfil.
I, that have been a soldier from my youth,
And fought out many a hard unequal confli&
With tribes and nations who no mercy knew,
Yet never felt my bosom thus alarm'd.

JEuILIuS.

AMILIUS.
For us, for Rome, thy Roman mind is mov'd.

VARUS.

In a new path I tread. 1, that ne'er us'd
Dissimulation, must a while dissemble.
Soon may the hour of nobler action come!
When in the front of my brave troops -I sand,
And dare the hateful tyrant with my sword,
My heart shall beat no more. My friends, farewel '

CORNELIA.
The gods protet thee, VARUS !

VARUS.

Consul, 'tis meet

You hold your troops prepar'd, and from the walls
Each motion watch, that rifes in our camp.

-JMILIus.
My vigilance shall equal the occasion.

Exit VA RUS

'Tis, as thou faid'ft, indeed the hand of heaven !
Ye powers supreme ! who guide the line of fate,
Whose winding course eludes the sense of man,
Who could have thought that from our deep diitrefs,
My sons' captivity, and threaten'd death,
Should'fpring the ruin of insulting MAXI MIN ?

CORNELIA.

Him, who contemns the gods, the gods will punish
Now or hereafter. To the altar I
Of JovE will haften, and his-power implore.
Here Lucius comes;

L 3 Enter

Enter Luclus.

.EMIL US. -
What tidings ?

Lu ci s.

Good, my lord!

Far on the diltant heights that close the vale,
The watchmen have descried a welcome fight,
Eagles and itandards glittering in the fuu,
Squadrons of horse that move along the hill.
Your faithful soldiers in-loud lhouts rejoice,
And hail the van of GORDI ANS' hot.

-JMILIUS.
Too soon, great gods! they come.

Lucius.

Too soon, my lord !

That cannot be. In a moft-happy hour
Relief approaches. For in every street
.Th' affliled citizens exclaim againft-you,
And, as they paTs, upbraid the patient soldier
For tame fubmffiiion to your rigid will;
Which even your children's danger cannot bend.

sM ILIU 5.

Would to the gods their murmurs and reproaches
Were all I had to bear!

Enter a Herald and an OfcErt

fr'om MAXIMIN.
Now bursts the itorm.

CO.RESLIA.

COR'NELIA.

This-is-not VARUS. Sternly he comes on.
This is the dreadful harbinger of death.! .

OFFICER.

Consul ! I come from MAXIMIK; that prince
Whose wrath is terrible, now burns with wrath
At thee, and fends me to denounce his vengeance.
lie hath difcover'd thy unworthy arts;
The fraudulent piopbfal of a truce,
When thou did'ft know the rebel host drew near.
Hilitlr I cone to cut all treaties short,
And to pronounce thy sons' immediate death,
Unless, withoutdelay, thou yield'R this city,
Thyself, thy legions, freely to his mercy.

tEMI LIUS.

A cruel meflage hardfly thou deliver'il,
The dreadful echo of thy threat'ning lord,
He grows in his demands.

OFFICE R:

'Tis fit he should '

When basely dealt with: treachery Rill finds.
Its due reward from him.

.EMILIUS.

Ha ! who art thou,
Who dar'ft presume thus to address the consul ?

OFFICER.

I am the slave of MAXIMIN ; if thou
Haft any other name, it is a worse one,
Rebel, proud Roman !

L 4 2EMILIUSa

AEMILIUS.

Thou'rt proteeted, slave

Thy charaster is sacred; elfe-Barbarian!-
Return to MAXIMIN, the terms I sent
By VA RUS I adhere to, and expea
Another answer, by a gentler herald.

CORNELIA.

Thou art no Roman. Wilt thou deign to tell
Thy name and country ?

OFFICER.
DUMNORIX my name,
My country Gaul.

CORNELIA.
And of Ligurian race,
Chief of the band Pretorian, art thou not

/ OFFICER.
I am, and faithful to the prince I serve.

CORNELIA.

Faithful to evil, false to all that's good !
To nature and humanity a traitor;
Contriver of the murder of my children I
My foul by firong antipathy divin'd thee,,
And fhudder'd at thee as her evil genius.

A.EMILIUS.

CORNELIA, beware, thou wrong'ft thyself,
Thus to expose to him thy wounded heart.

OFFICER.

VARUS, your countryman, hath told you, Lady!
What counsel I fiiggeltd to my prince.

'his

'This I expeced from a Roman messenger,
Whose treachery his mailer soon shall know,
He told you true. From me the counsel came;
I thought the dames of Rome had lov'd their children.

[Exit DUMNORIX.

CORNELIA. -.
Oh ! my husband! What remedy, what hope!

'3MILIUS.'

In VARUS fillI trust. The troops of Romie
Are near at hand. That insolent Ligurian
Hath chaf'd me to the height. O! awful Rome!
Where are thy honours ? Queen of all the earth!
How art thou fallen ! When a vile slave like this,
Insults thy consul, and decrees the doom -
Of thy Patrician race ! If this must be,
'Iis time to die; we all have liv'd too long.

CORNELIA-.

I felt the insult, but my feeble anger
Blaz'd for a moment only. Other pafions
Soon quench'd my indignation. 0 ! my children C'

Enter an OFFICER,

OFFICEl.
To arms, my lord ! The enemy comes on.

AEMILIUS.

We are prepar'd, for MAXIM IN is known.
I !ook'd for this attack. Againfi what gate
B1r;d they their force ?

L OFFICER.

OFFICER.
They threaten every gate;

Tor all their legions move. Ditinft I.faw
Three mighty columns floaling to the plain,
And in their front are carriages advanc'd
Loaded with beams and rafters, fit to frame
:Some engine itrong, against our baster'd walls.

JEMIL IUS.
Be not afraid. [To CORNELIA.]

[EAout.]

What means that fearful cry?
CORNELIA.

-A cry'! it was a groan, a dreadful groan,
As if a multitude, a legion died.

JE.MILIUS.
Tarewell

CORNELIA.
My lord, one moment lay, behold

Enter Lucius,

AMILIUS.'
From whence that dismal cry2

- OFFICER.

Alas! alas!

It was the people's voice, the soldiers voice,
Lamenting foryour sons.

ZCORNELIA.

Already! heaven!

' MIL IUS

- iMILIUS.
Say, what has befallen ?

OFFICER.

Still, my lord, they live ?
But on the verge of death the brothers sand.

CORNELIA. -
Still they live!

IMILIUS.

U.ninterrupted now relate,
Without a comment, what thy eyes have seen;

OFFICER.

The host of MAXIMIN for fight array'd,
In three huge columns onward slowly mov'd,
And when their van had reach'd the little hill,
From whence the fountain springs, fat by the wall
The army halted: then appear'd a band,
Busy artificers, who rear'd in haste, -
A pile we wonder'd at; but soon was chang'd
·Our wonder into sorrow, when we knew
It was a'fcaffold; and beheld your sons,
.Guarded and bound, draw near. That lpecacle
Produc'd the cry.

CORNELIA.

O !insupportable.!
My lord! my husband! oh !

.EMILLUS.

Matron, retire,
And hide thy anguilh from the.common eye.

L 6 CORNELLA.u

CORNELIA.
Ha I whither dolt thou go ?

.EMILIUS.

Streight to the gate.

CORNELIA. -

Where thou art, I will be. I cannot leave thee,
Have mercy upon me, your sons, yourself,
And to neceflity a little yield;
Intreat a thort delay, new terms propound,
Let not your children die.

JEMILIUS.

'Think'ft thou thy sons

Will chufe a life, bought by their father's hame?
If right my foul divines of both my boys,
What they dread moit this inflant, is to live,
- Redeem'd inglorious with my honour los.

CORNELIA.

I am encompassed; on a pointed rock
I fland, a dreadful gulph on either fide.

MILIUS.

The time is not expir'd; some hours the fun
Hath yet to fall; this awful preparation
Is meant to terrify and Thake my foul,
That I may bow before the next demand.
Go to the palace, when a message comes
From the fell tyrant, thou thalt hear it answered.

CORNELIA.

Deal not, my lord, deceitfully with me.
I have a right, a mother's right.

J5tlTTt1,

JMILIUS.

Be calm,

Let me conjure thee by the sacred names
Of thy great anceRors, -who died for Rome,
Remember them, and prove thyielf their daughter.

[Exit AMILIUS.

CORNELIA alone.

My ancestors! alas ! ill-omen'd names!
Ye shades of heroes, o'er the world renown'd
For virtue, and for great misfortunes fam'd
Why ihould I think of you, but to confirm
The dire presage that rifes from my heart?
Your matchless worth exempted not from ills,
But was the cause recorded of your ruin.
Sprung from your blood, I fear that I am born
Heir.to the fortunes of the fated line.

;- - [Exit CORNELIA.
The End of the THIRD ACT.

ACT

. . , \
A-C T IV.

Enter Lucius.

TWin report the truth; too visible'

Is the fad obje&t from our crowded walls.

Unhappy mother! whom excess ofanguifh
Drives to pursue additional distress!
. ! good and great SM.ILIUS ! how my foul
Is griev'd for thee, and for thy valiant fonsJ
Whom I fo-oft have carried in my arms.
vly generous mailer made me free in vain;
Still I remain'd a voluntary slave,
Frefer'd his service in-a foreign land
To sweet LA R ss A, and my native mhore.
My only son, under his roof brought forth,
Born on the day that gave young TITUS birth,
Bred up with him in every Roman art,
.-Unlike the rudeness of our simple land,
Wild with despair, vows he will not outlive
,His dear, dear lord! his kind, his noble matter.

Enter CORNELIA.

CORNELIA.

Calamity comes on me like a torrent,
And overwhelms a mind not us'd.to woe.

ba.

Ha! Lucius, haftthou'feen mfy haplefs.fons ?
Say, can I view them from th' adjacent wall -

Lucius. -
Too well, alas! conspicuous they stand.

CORNELIA.
Lucius, lead on.

Lucius.
Relutant I obey.
I fear the transports of a mother's mind.

CORNELIA.

I will behold them; I will fee my children;
Whate'er befal me; I will gaze upon them,
Tho' frantic madness fhouldmpy foul furprize:
All lesser fears are in a greaterloft.
Hafle and condut me.

Lucius.

The fadfpelacle
Is near at hand.

CORNELIA.

0 ! feeble limbs that fail,
And weakly serve the strength of my despair!

Lucius.
'Tis nature shrinks. ! lady! yetbe warn'd.

CORNELIA.

No; if mywretched limbs refufetheir office,
The arms of slaves mall bear me to the wall.
I'm firmer now, proceed. -

Lucius.

The herald comes,

CORNELIA.
The last of heralds; but I will not tarry.

[Exeunt CORNBLIAand ILuCIUs
Enter Herald and VARUS.

VARUS.

This is the place appointed by the consul;
Find, and inform him quickly of nmy presence.

[Exit Herald,

VARUS alone.

They mufl not die. It were a deed to firike
Horror from'pole to pole. The Parthian fierce,
And the wild Moor would tremble at the tale,
And mark accurst the pale of Roman empire.
Tyrant, too savage over beats to rule !
Fidelity to theewerehorrid treason
To human nature, to the gracious gods,
Who o'er ditreft humanity preside.
This day has full difplay'd the tyrant's foul,
And ripen'd thoughts long growing in my bread.
'Tis vain to think of antient freedom now;
The Senate, and the People are no more.
Rome's vast dominions for the scepter call,-
The world fubdu'd, one master muff command.
But let us have a monarch, not a tyrant,

Enter EMILIUS.

. AEMILIUS.
VAUS ireturn'd ! can MAX i M j N relent!

VARUS.

VARUS.

Never! his rage would flab the hoary Priest
Before the altar. Hardly have I gain'd i
This last renewal of the first conditions.

-EMILIUS.
Where is the holt of Rome ?

VARUS.

Far diftant.ftill.

Those squadrons, that in evil hour alarm'd
The tyrant, and defeated our design,
The zeal of Go RD N AUs had advanced
To chear your troops, with promise of relief.

'./EMiLIUS.

'Tis fate o'erwhelms us. To the tyrant bear
My firrt and latest answer. With delight,
With transport I would die to save my sons;
But will not save them by an at ofbafenefs.,

VARUS.

With fortitude, with dignity, AEMILIUS,
Thou haft fuftain'd this cruel thock of fortune,
And juftify'd the sentiments of Rome,
That plac'd her sovereign confidence in thee.
Now hear the counsel of a faithful friend,
Anxious for thee, and zealous for his country.

AMILIUS.

No vain desire of glory rules my breat;
I feel the throbs of nature : all I wish
Is to be just to Rome; I envy not,
Nor emulate the older Brutus' fame.

VARUS.

VARUS.

The pr6ffer'd terms accept, and save thy children..
Rome shall not susser ' when her troops draw near, -
I will forsake. the tyrant's ihatter'd fide,
And fix the fortune of the' future field.

lEM ILIVS.

Compaflion ditates this delusive counsel;
Thy pity for a miserable father;
But chance may marr thy generous design,
And deep dismay for Aquileia loft,
Confound the legions that contend.for Rome.
Then whither shall forlorn EM imius fly ?
Where shall he hide him from reproach and shame?
What joy, what comfort, will his children yield,
When he and they with infamy mugt dwell I
A new companion to our noble race.
qo!J rather let the blow tremendous fall,
And cruh. us in the path our fathers trode,
I fee the image of my bleedingcountry:
I hear the voice of Rome her confulcall;
The chosen guardian in her lat extreme, i
'City of. Gods! mother of heroes fam'd

Like gods of old ! Ihall I abandon thee,
For whom so many noble youths have died,
So many fathers P

Enter CORNELIA.

Now, my heart, be firm.

CoR,

CORNELiA.'

Where is aMIiE.IU ? the hard hearted father,
Who whets the tyrant's sword against his children!

LM ILIUS.
Alas, CORNELIA

CORNLIA.

have seen my sons,

Both bound with chains: I saw the deadly ax,
And the tern villain htanding by their fide.
Consul ! I kneel to thee! 0 hear thy wife
Hear me, my husband, whilst I yet have sense
And reason left to regulate my words.
0 drive me not to madness, to despair
Already wavering on the brink I sand,
In agony extreme.

MIrLIUS.
Truf in slte gods

They sooth the agonies of guiltless woe,
But to despair resign the felf-condemn'd.
0 my beloved wife, do not assail
Thy husband's foul, that labours to be jut,
Heaven knows how dear to my afflitied heart
Thou, and the pledges of our virtuous love,
Have ever been; more dear than ever now.
But if their danger, and thy fears ffould bend
My yielding mind to baseness and to shame,
Remorse would break the concord of our love,
And hate succeed to criminal affetion.

Cop-

'CORNELIA.

Me only hate;, acquit thy noble sons,
Too like thyself; .EMILIUS, had'lt thou fecn%
Thy sons, as I beheld them from the ramparts..
With head erect, and high, my PAULUS lood.
I knew his lature eminent; unmov'd,
And iedfaft was his gesture, firm he feem'd,
Like a firong castle on its-rocky base.
The port of TI TUS ihew'd a mind less calm..
Around he look'd, and from his scornful eyes,
Threw on his foes defiance, and disdain.
At lat in earnest speech the brothers join'd.
' I saw them whisper; PAULUS bow'd his head.

The multitude, long silent at my presence,-
Lamented then; the weeping mothers clafp'd
Their infants to their breasts, and look'd at me.
I left the walls, to find thee out, myhufband !
And lead thee thither, that thou might'ft relent,

AJMILIUS.

Relent, CORNELIA! ,0 eternal powers,]
That fee the anguish of my tortur'd foul,
Sustain me still; let not my duty yield
To the strong yearning of a father's heart.

CORNELIA.

Why speaks not VARUS ? Has he too confpir'd
Against me and my children ?

VARUS.

I have spoke,

And told the consul, that his sons may live,
And Roman arms o'er MAXIMIN prevail.

COR.

CORNELIA.
What would'st thou more ? inexorable man!

VARUS. !

I fee the bottom of thy troubled mind,
And in this awful hour revere thy virtue,
Which itands aloof, and trembles at dishonour.
But hear this new addition to my counsel;
Soldiers I have, in every danger try'd,
Bred to hard service in our British wars,
Accuftom'd to explore the forests wild,
Alone, amidit the perils of the night,
And mingle fearless with the savage foes;
Difguis'd in their attire and uncouth arms,
Of those the most expert, I will dilpatch,
That GORDIANUS may his arms advance.

Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.
My Lord, your son approaches.

CORNELIA.

Ha !i my son !

OFFICER.

TTrus, your bon, attended by a herald,
Slow thro' the gazing multitude proceeds,
Who weep and bless him.

.EMILI US.

Ha ! what change is this ?

OF-

OFFICER.

The herald, as he pafles, scatters gladness,
Saying that TITUS comes to end the war,
And to compassion move his father's mind.

M ILIUS.

Tl Irs ! does TITUS come to plead-compaRfon?
Now, deftiriy, thou tramplet down JEMILIUs.
Go tell him, Herald, that I willnot fee him;
Let him not come to hear me curse the hour
That made me father of a son like him.

CORNELIA.
Judge not so rashly, fee and hear thy son.

ENMILIUS.

Mention him not; that father has my envy
-Who mourneth o'er his sons in battle slain.
-Short-sighted mortals ! Let no man repine
When fate bereaves him of the child he loves;
Amidst his anguish let him think of mine,
And that will comfort him.

CORNELIA;

This is not well,

Norlike my son; yet valour cannot change
its quality so quickly. He hath prov'd
His dauntless courage. Death in:terror clad
Could not dismay him. But his noble mind
Is iway'd by pity of his brother's fate,
In his involv'd.

EnterTius. . .

AMILIUS. .
Gods! unabafh'd he seems
Nor at his mofl inglorious purpose bluthes.

[2EMILiUS turnsfrom hinh .

CORNELIA.-
Dear to thy mother fill.

TITUS. [To his father,]

Turn not away-
Nor hold thy TITus bfonelook unworthy;

AEM ILIUS.

Art thou my TIT u s? Thou that fear't1 to die,
And comes a fervile-fuppliarit for life !
With coward prayers to reduce the consul.
No! thou art not my son. Ihad a son r
Whose only fault was valour to excess,
Whole fatal courage was the source of ills
Which he was bound in honour to fuRain.
Thou art not he ! thou scandal to thy country!
Thou tool of MAXI MIN.

TITUS.

Wrong not thy Ton.

FaR roll the number'd moments of my life,
And I muit haflen to redeem my fame.

CORNELIA.
I fear, but know not what his words portend.

TITUS.

TITUS.

I have deceiv'd the tyrant, and am come
No messenger nor counsellor of lhame.
The cause of honour, of my father's honour,
The cause of Rome against myself I plead,
And in my voice the noble PAULUS speaks.
Let no man pity us; aloft we iland
On a high theatre, obje&ts I think
Of admiration and ofenvy rather.
The tyrant and his menac'd deaths we scorn,
The chearful victims of our sacred country.

JEMILIUS.

Hear this! 0 earth and heaven ! my son! my pride!
Come to thy. father's arms; now, now I know
My blood again. O bitter pleasing hour!
For I mull lore thee, lose thee, O my hero I
Now when I love thee belf, and most admire.

CoRNELIA.

- Preserve that virtue which you thus admire,
My son! myhulband! VARUS, pity me.

TITUS.

This to prevent I came; the force I sear'd
Of strong affection, and a mother's tears.
We saw the bury heralds come and go,
And trembled left the consul might-be'won;
For ebbing resolution ne'er returns,
But still falls farther from its former ihore.
To aid my father in this trying hour
Did I assume a dastard's vile disguise.

.E,.n-

E .MILIUS.

And did Imeet you withp h

reprc and anger?

With scorn encounter my devoted son,.
Who came to firengthen and support his fire '
Forgive me, laft;of the ,Emilian line !
Pure and unftain'd the current of our blood
Ends as it long has flow'd. .

CORNELIA. .

OVARus ! fpek;

Tell them, thou guardian'anigel of thy country ! '
That Rome does not this sacrifice demand.
Why Thould they die in vain ?

VARUS.

Thou'noble youth,

Whose life more-and mote' preciouis' fill I deem,
lam the friend of Rome ;- of yonder'holt
No slender part under my erifigns move.
With them I watch'the tyrant's'overthrow,
And guard my country with a itronger power,
Than Aquileia, and her feeble walls.
Great is thy glory,' thou haft reach'd the top
Of magnanimity in bloom of youth,
The REG:ULUS reviv'd ofantient'Rome;
Inflexible to terror, yield to prudence,
No tongue shall tax thine or thy father's fame..

TITUS. -

Renowned VARUS 'often have I heard
Of thee, and of thy virtues; oft rejoic'd,
That I could claim affinity with them ;.

. B.u t
Ba.

But not the fanaion of thy honour'd voice,
Not all the credence due to-worth like thine,
Can move my iRedfaft mind.. There is but one,
One only path which mortals fafely-tread; -
The sacred path of retitude and'truth.
I.follow, tho' it leads me'to the'tomb.
Forgive me, noble Roman ! o'er thy head,
Perhaps, this infiant dire discovery hangs,
And thou and Rome are loft, and basely loft.
No, let the consul, as he ought, defy
The tyrant's threat'ning, and rely on heav'n.
For me, and PAULUS too, our hearts are six'd,
Deliberation of our state is vain:
For if the consul fmould the city yield,
Inevitable death abides his sons.

' CORNELIA.
Eternal Gods! thy mytic words explain.

TITUS.

A solemn oath determin'd we have sworn '
Ne'er to survive the ignominious ranfor.
RefRor'd to liberty, to death we fly,
And perish mutual by each other's sword.

- MILIUS.

Immortal Gods! who gave me sons like'thefe,
Forsake them not, but guard your work divine.

C6RNELIA.

My best belov'd! my darling! my fond heart
Bleed. tenderness for thee. But there is something
So awful and so great, a glory round thee,

Which

,Which dazzles and o'erwhelms me. O my son!
Is life a burden ? Lov'lt thou not thy parents ?
Who for the love of thee would gladly die. !,

TITUS. .

Think not, Obeft of mothers, befi of women,
That with unfilial arrogance I speak.
My heart is full this .instant of affection,
Hard to suppress. Dear to my foul are those
I leave behind, bitter to me their sorrows.
But deltiny fupreme-hath'mark'd my way:
And I accept what honour cannot shun.
By trivial accident, by various ills
Fatal to man, thou might't have loft thy sons,
And they in dark oblivion would have slept:
Butnow IfeethegoalthatJovE afigns,
And glory terminates our short career.
Be this thy consort; I avow it mine.
Admir'd and mourn'd by Rome, for Rome we die,
Of fate secure, immortal is our fame,
And spotless laurels deck thy childrens tomb.

CORNELIA'

Myflerious Powers ! how firange is my distress!
Thy virtue, TITUS, rends thy mother's heart 1
Ev'n now the grandeur of thy tow'ring foul
Ealts my humbler mind to thoughts like thine:
But when thou goeft, alas I I fink again,
Like the weak Pythian when her God has left her.

TITUS.: .
My father! '

M 2 MI-

.EMILIUS.

O. myfon, thou art the judge

And arbiter of fate. Time, rapid fly,-
And bring a joyful viEtory. to Rome.
Let me but fee thefcale of combat turn'd,
And die in glad assurance of her safety.

VARUS.

The hero's fire invades my secret foul: .
Like his my bosom burns. You flall not die,.

[To TITUS,]

Unaided and alone. Perhaps the.Gods !-
I know not.that; but I will raise a pile
Of glorious ruin. Shine, ye tars of.Rome.
Firi in the column ,sand my British bands.

[To AEMILIUS.

Prepare your squa'drons, and protract the time
Of his return.
Enter PRIEST fJUP I TER, and theyounger Luclus,

PRIEST.
Consul ofmighty.Rome

Firm be the purpose of the present hour.
The fire of Gods a happy sign hath giv'n:
Trust in the aid of heav'n's eternal :king,
His adamantine aegis JOVE extends.

VARUS.

Romans and friends, farewell! Undaunted TITVus
1 go to aid thee too with mortal arms. [Exit VARvS,

TITVSi

TITUS.

Deem me not impious, servant of the Gods !
Thee, and thy sacred officeI revere, .
But signs and omens may our thoughts deceive.
Men may mistake the purposes ofheav'n;
'The shield of Jov E guards not the brave man's life,
Nor wards his body from the mortal blow,
A Ihield there is, that never can be pierc d,
The heav'nly armour of a mind refolv'd.
That mail who wears agairift all force is clad,
And triumphs o'er the fate by -which he falls.

Enter OFFICER.

OFFICER.

My Lords! th' assembled citizens demand
An audience,

JEMILIUS. -

Tell them, No. It will require

My presence to appease their fearful clamour.
Retire, my son, and, till the herald comes,
A fad but dear society enjoy. [Exeiur.

The End of the FOURTH ACT.

M3 ACT

A C T V.

uThe frumpets found.
Enter TITUS, CORNELIA, and mEMILUs,

TITUSr
OR me the trumpet founds.

CORNELIA.

0 dreadful fouid!

TITUS.
The hour is come.

CORNELIA.

Alas! not yet, my son!
To the lat moment lay. So VA RUS counfeil'd.

TITUS.

The herald's at the gate. I mulf not flay,
Nor linger, like a criminal oppreft
With shameful fears. Farewell, my fire, farewell!

CORNELIA.

Thou goefl to die, and fay'ft thou but farewell?
It were too little, if from Rome thou went'ft
A sportful journey to the Bnian mhore.
Put thou art going never to return,
To the dark region.

r l ,r1!.

TITUS.
Where all-men have gone:

Where all must go; but glorious is the path
Thy offspring tread. An honourable death
Is the sole gift which fate cannot resume.
Methinks it suits us not thus to discourse:
Combat thy grief, and make our parting noble.

CORNELIA.

Nature forbids. I cannot conquer nature.
Speak not so firm, look not so unconcern'd:
Leave in thy mother's ear some tender words,
Fit for eternal memory.

TITus.

If thou lov'it,

0 spare thy Coh, left MA XIMIN should think
He has subdued me. No. He Shall not fee
Upon my cheek the veltige of a tear.

.EMILIUS.

Thy spirit ihall inspire thy-father's foul,
Till to the shades he finks to meet thee there:
Then to the founders of immortal Rome
I'll point my heroes.-To my PAULUS this,

[Emtnrace.]
And nowv, farewell.

CORN-ELIA.

Alas ! thy fire despairs,

He quits thy hand; till now I ne'er defpair'd,
The moment is arriv'd, the dreadful moment,
I durit not think of, and-cannot endure.

M 4 O-TITUS!

O TITUS ! TITUS ! let-me clasp thy neck.
My son! those eyes 1 never shall behold
In living-luftre-more.

'Enter Luclus.

Lucius.
Strife and confusion

Reign in the tyrants camp. HimfelfIfaw
Leap from his high tribunal.

- AMILIU.S.

Sound th'alarm.
This is the work of VARUS.

TITUS.

Consul, beware.

Hostility from thee is breach offaith,
Whilst I remain.

IEM I LIUS.
Too true, my son! Begone,
And free thy father's sword.

CORNELIA. [Embraces hi,:.]

He shall not go.

Oneinflant saves him, keeps him from the form.
My arms have firength enough to h'oldmy son,
My only left, for now his brother dies.

TITUS.

Nothing shall hold me. I have deeply sworn,
And left my brother pledge of my return;
Left him, to bear alone the tyrant's rage,

**~~~
- ~To

To die by torture, if I break my faith.
Thus would'll thou buy my life! Unhand me ftreight.:
Or I mull tear myself. 1l

EM ILIUS.

Thy frenzy, woman,

Cuts off our last resource, adds ihame to ruin;
I will not, cannot succour noble VARUS, -
And much-wrong'd PAULUS, till thou fett'it him free.
The clamour ceases, Oh! what hall thou done ?

CORNELIA.

There, let him go, and perish with his brother.
Forgive this aaion; for excels of anguish
Deprives CORNELIA of her reason's aid.
Now comes the raven that itill bodes my woes.

Enter Herald and DUMNORIX.

DUMNORIX.
Captive, the time's expir'd.

TITUS.

Soldier, 'tis well.
Turn to the gate thy' teps, I follow thee.

DUM s ORIX.

Thou art the firit that e'er employ'd deceit
Againfi himself; thy artifice prevails.

[To 11EILIUS ]

Roman! once more, tho' not from love, I speak;
Yield tiee, for now thou halt no hope in VA RUS,

EM ILIUS.

Who told thee, that my resolution stood
Onfuch ahope ? What hath befallen V ARU s ?

M S DUM.-

DuMNORIX.

His treason is deteled; -he himself
Seiz'd, and condemn'd with thy ralh sons to die.

CORNELIA.

Eternal Gods !-How did the-legions brook
Their valiant leader's fate ?

DU MNORIX;

Her tongue betrays

Your secret expetation ofrevolt,
TWhere al' is calm fubmifilon.. VARUS came
From hence, entrufled with your last resolve,
And, like an orator, addreft himself
To the tribunal, with a voice so rais'd,
That every soldier in the circle heard-;
And as he told a tale to move their pity,
A sudden murmur rose. The emperor
Leapt from his throne, and call'd aloud to seize
The artful traitor. Soon his guards obey'd.

JAMILIUS.

VARUS, the noble VARUS, too must die.
But-there are Gods above! Vengeance is theirs,
The tyrant yet ihall feel.

CORNELIA.

Will vengeance raise
,My children from the t6mb ?

DUMNORIX.

Thou queftion'il well.
Matron, I pity thee. Canfl thou not move

Thy

Thy husband's heart to spare his dying sons,
Nor win thy children to consent to live ?

CORNELIA.

Thou pityme thou, whose inhuman foul
Devis'd the counsel that has caus'd my woe.
In vain dost thou attempt my troubled mind;
Had I a magic voice, to cleave the earth,
To pluck the fun and moon from their high sphere,
Unmov'd my hulband and my tons would hear me.

TITUS.
This ineffectual conference I'll end.

[To DUMNORIX.]

'Tis not your office, fir,^to counsel here,
ConduE me to the camp.

DUMNORIX.

I will, be sure.

The death that thou haft courted, now abides thee:
Come, try the rough embrace.

TITUS.

Lead on, Ligurian!
I anfver to thy lord. [Going.]

CORNEL IA.

TITUs, my son !
Break, break my heart, for I'can bear no more.

[Swoons:]

TITUS.

She faints, flpport her; now let me escape
From her affliEtion: think of Rome, my father! [Exit.

[CORNELIA is carried off ]
M 6. Manet

z~z .Th$~óge~sA9..U2

. '
M anet JEMILIUS.

AMILIUS.

Of Rome! aye, and. of thee, of thee, my son,
And of thy brother. 0 unequall'd pair,
Your deeds, your destiny have rais'd your fire
Above the pitch' of man. My heartis steel,
I weep not, nor complain. Relentless fiend,
Inhuman MAXIMIN ! for thee I live;
To bury in thy hated breast my sword,
Then die upon the'blow.

Enter Lucius.

Lucius.

Thy faithful slave,

Uncall'd, intrudes upon his malter's woe.
Resign not to despair thy noble mind,
Still there is hope.

.EMILIUS.

Affeaionate old man!

Thou fpeak'1t thy eareft wilh, but my frail hopes
Were wreck'd with VAius.

Lucius.

Oft when wisdom fails,

Chance interposes, and atchieves the deed.
The British legions, wheeling from their host,

An-

An angry parley with the tyrant hold,
And every rank re-echoes VARUs' name.

2EMIxIU'S.

Immortal gods! Would I were at their head.
A single spark may kindle up the flame.

Lucius.

My son, devoted to his matier's fate,
Arm'd like a soldier of the tyrant's guard,
Mix'd with the heiald's train.

JEMILIUS.

0 generous youth

Perhaps--but I have nourifh'd hope too much.
IHe who divelts him of that conflancy
Which stands in expectation of the worst,
Encounters fortune with a naked br-eat..
I will do so no more. Now I go forth
Less credulous of what my foul desires,
But not remiss to feize-on swift occasion,
And urgeitto the utmost. Lucius, fay
And tell CORNELIA-She has no support,
No medicine, but hope-I'll to the gate.

[Exit REMIL UvS.
Manet Lucius.

Lucius.

O best of men, I know where thou wilt go,
The firet alarm provokes thee to the field,
One fate abides the children, and their fire.
Tyrannic fortune ! when thou raifeft up

. Nanet EtMILIU$S.

EMILIUS.

Of Rome! aye, and of thee, of thee, my son,
And of thy brother. 0 unequall'd pair,
Your deeds, your destiny have rais'd your fire
Above the pitch' of man. My heart is steel, '
I weep not, nor complain. Relentless fiend,
Inhuman MAXIMIN ! for thee I live;'
To bury in thy hated breast my sword,
Then die upon the'blow.

Enter Lucius.

Lucius.

Thy faithful slave,

Uncall'd, intrudes upon his master's woe.
Resign not to despair thy noble mind,
Still there is hope.

JEMILIUS.

AffeEtionate old man!

Thou fpeak'ft thy earnei with, but my frail hopes
Were wreck'd with VA us.

Lucius.

Oft when wisdom fails,

Chance interposes, and atchieves the deed.
The British legions, wheeling from their host,

An

An angry parley with the tyrant hold,
And every rank re-echoes VARUS' name.

£M-ILU s.

Immortal gods ! Would I were at their head
A single spark may kindle up the flame.

Lucius.

My son, devoted to his master's fate,
Arm'd like a soldier of the tyrant's guard,
Mix'd with the herald's train.

.EMILIUS.

0 generous youth I

Perhaps--but I have nourifh'd hope too much.
He who diveRts him of that conflancy
Which stands in expectation of the worlf,
Encounters fortune with a naked breast.
I will do so no more. Now I go forth
Less credulous of what my foul desires,
But not remiss to feize-on swift occasion,
And urge it to the utmost. Lucius, Ray
And tell CORNELIA-She has no support,
No medicine, but hope-I'll to the gate.

[Exit EEMILIUS,

Manet Lucius. ..
nlanet LUCIUS.

Lucius.

O best of men, I know where thou wilt go,
The first alarm provokes thee to the field,
One fate abides the children, and their fire.
Tyrannic fortune I when thou raifeft up

TO)

To envy'd eminence the sons of men,
Thou but prepar'ft a triumph for thyself,
A second triumph from their grievous fall.
Alike the column, and its ruins, mark
Thy sovereign sway. Now Luc us will obey
Thy orders, lord; then haflen to thy fide;
The humble shrub shall with the cedar fall.

[CORNELIA behind the Senet,

CORNELIA.
Stand off.

Lucius.

CORNEL i A' voice; it founds of woe.
[En.er CoR NELIA, followed by hbr 'woman.

CORNELIA.

Stand off, fay, and let me find my hufLand.
Fit mate for me, for me, whose eyes have seen
The murder of my child.

Lucius.

Alas! alas!
The blow at last hath fall'n.

CORNELIA.

His fireaming blood
I saw.

Lucius.
His blood ! whom has the tyrant spar'd I

COR NELIA.

None, Lucius, none. I tarry'd not to fee
A second firoke. Oh lead me to my husband.

Lucius.

Lucius.
He guards the gate.

[Sound of trumlpets

But hark his trumpets found,

And found a charge. Lady, my son went forth
To rouse the Britih legions to defend
Their leader, and thy sons. That found proclaims
Tumult and war are up. My lord is there.

[Exit.
Manent Co RNELI A and attendants.

CO RNELIA.

The frantic father rushes to revenge
His sons, or throw the load of life away.
The desolate CORNELIA Ihe remains,
Her children murder'd, and her hulband slain.

- Enter PRIEST.

Where are thy omens, thy predicions too,
Thou priet of falihood !

PRIEST.
Know 'twas VARUS fell,

And not thy son; his fall the signal prov'd
Of instant battle. With a-whirlwind's rage
His legions rufh'd upon the tyrant's guard;
Thy valiant sons are free, and lead-the fight.

CORNELIA,

CORNELIA.

Can this be truth ? Shall I again believe, ' :
And wake me from the dreadful dream of death
That had poleft my foul?

PRIEST.

Matron! thy sons,

Thy husband tco, 'vitorious thall return.
I saw the bird of JOVE his wings extend,
And hover o'er their battle; fill he bears
Upon his pinions conquest.

CORNELIA.

Say'ft thou so!

Then heaven and thou forgive me. JOVE supreme!
If I have ought offended, on my head,
On mine alone, let all thy wrath descend:
But spare my sons, and spare their blameleft fire,

Enter Lucius.

Luclus.

Lady, rejoice, the tyrant is no more;
His barbarous cohorts yield.

CORNELIA.

'Blef be thy tongue.
But tell me of my sons, and of their father ?

Lucius.

With voice and hand they urge the fainting foe,
Whose courage with their furious leader died.
Long, like a mound againfl the raging main,.

Stood

Stood MAXI M IN, the bulwark of his host;
His strength defied the fury of the form;
Till to the van refiftlefs:TITu s came.
By TITUs':noble arm:the giant fell,
And o'er him ruti'd the war.

*CORNELIA.

Not without cndrh

And havock round him, such a ruin fell.
0 minister of heaven I why dost thou bend
Thine eye on empty space, and gaze on air ?
Can'st thou defcrythe future, or perceive
Events accomplifh'd, tho' unknown ?

PRIEST.

'Tis done.

The weary fillers reft.' CYLLENIUS-comes,
Like a bright meteor ftreaming-down the vault
Of azure heaven; in his right hand the rod,
And in his left, a laurel dropping blood,
Lehold !

Enter EMILIUS attended.-

CORNELIA.

My husband ! oh ! Where haft thou left
Thy sons ?-

EMILIUS.
They come victorious from the field.

CORNELIA,

Why dost thou faintly speak such welcome tidings ?
Thou art not wounded ?

AMILIUS.

.EMILIUS.

No; -
CORNELIA.

From whence that cloud

Which overcafls thy brow ? What damps thy joy/
Tell me, .EMILUS ! for I read thy foul,
There undivulg'd some cruel evil lies.

JEMILIUS.
Alas!

CORNELIA;

Thou figh't not thus for VARUVS o10.,

My sons, thou fay'it, draw near; what is the grief
That wrings thy heart?

MMILIUS.
0 summon to thine, aid

What conRfancy thou haft; soon Ihalt thou fee
What I would not relate.

CORNELIA.

Ha! am I mock'd
WVithfalfe reports ?

What fpeCacle is this!
[Enter TITUS 'wounded, and fiupported I

PAULUS and soldiers.]
-Are these the viaors! oh my'TITus dies!

TITUS.

I flood the chance of war. Do not bewail
A fate so far above my highelt hope
When lalf we parted. Men are born to die.

CORNELIA,

CORNELIA.
But not like thee, in youth untimely slain. .

TITUS.

This a&ive day has been an age of life.
Rome is deliver'd. Thou haft lill a son.
Why mourns my brother o'er a soldier's fall

PAULUS.
I griev'd not, TITUS ! when our lot was equal.

CORNELIA. -

There will be wars again to snatch thee too.
Fear not too long a life: the useless live,
The vile, the odious thy desert is death.

TITus;

My limbs grow weak, upon the earth: I'll reft.
Have I redeem'd my rashness O my father!

2EMILIUS.

'Tis scarce a blemish to be brave to rafhnef:
To thee Rome owes her safety, her existence;
And with her chief deliverers ranks thy name.

TITUS.

I feel my father'sopraife, now when the hand
-Of death comes near my heart.

CORNELIA;

I will be calm.

O let me not dilturb his parting foul.
Sulain me, mighty gods!

TIT S.

To sooth her grief,
My PAULUS, be thy care. My las request,

My

My father, hear. 0 comfort that good man;
His son before me ,rushing, in his breafdt
Receiv'd a javelin, that was aim'd at mine.
Cherish his age.

. [Dies.]

EM LItUS.

Thou Roman, to the height

Of Roman virtue! to lament for thee,
With common wailings, were a feeble part;
And far beneath the spirit of.ty fall;
Unwortly of thy father. -

PAULUS.

From this place
Let me persuade my mother..to, retire.-

·CORNE LIA.

I must behold the dead. . Fear not excess,
Nor vehemence from me. Those features wear
A look.of triumph. Yes, thy mother's heart,
Amidst her anguifi, at that look revives.
The cruel fate thy generous mind embrac'd
Thou haft efcap'd, to meet the death thou lov'd'l
In arms, victorious o'er thy prostrate foe.
Now to the place, where I will dwell with grief,
And ever lifnen to my heroe's praise.

[Exit CORNELIA 'with PAULUS.

PRIEST.

.He fell not till each omen was accomplifh'd,
Himself, his brother, and his country free.
- No height, beyond the summit where he flood,

On

On earth remain'd: that Je might ne'er descend, .'
The gods could only grant a death like his.

EMILIUS. :

Hence to. the.forumbear the,noble corpse;.
And let the mufick of the legions found
A warlike symphony, whose firains express
Our mingled.flate of triumphs and. offorrow.

Exeunt omnes.

' -I

# EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mrs. CIBBER.

E P I L- O :- : --U- E.

Spoken by :Mrs; C1 B B E R.
OUR Autbor, as m7told, is nt to seek

In antient Lore; in Latin, nor in Greek.

'therefore did advise him, as a friend,
To make his learning serve fme useful end:
And let me tell, ,what rules he hath obferv'd,
?What unities of time and placepre/erv'd.
He anfcer'd, Poetry is not an art;
''is nature only frames the poet's heart:
Still as he thinks the feene, hefeels along,
Andfriom his bosom birfjl the raptur'dd/ong.
This is thefacred oracle, the hrine,
The bard consults, and here, the tuneful Nine.
WFith the fame fire, the hearer's foul mifl glow,
Else vain to him, the tale of tragick 'woe.
There is a temper, `which is all and all:
That founds r efponf-ve to the poet's call.
Like Meannon's harp, uwhich pour'd harmonious lays,
Whene'er itslrings ,were touch'd by Phbbus' rays.

This

Ihs temper of thefoul is sweet and wild;
Itfobs, orflmiles, a/fudden as a child;
so woei imagin'd tears unfeigned gives,
.aid in the poet's world offancy lives.

Whilf thuss hffeoke, a bell was heard to ring;

Hefiop'd, and fartled like a guilty thing;
Ere the dread curtain role, in hafle withdrew,
And at a difance waits his doom from yo.

F I N I S.
