DO UG LA S:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is ACTLD at the
T;E ATRES

I N
Great-britain andlreland.

Non ego fum oates, fed prifci confcius tmi.
By the Rev. J O H N H ME.

To which are prefixed,

I. AnAddrefs to the Author. By Dsv o HuMz, Efq,

Author of the History of Great-Britain, &c.
II. Copy of an Admonition and Exhortation, by the

Rev. Pre(bytery of Edinburgh.
11I. Copy of a Declaration, by the Rev. Presbytery
of Giafgow.

D U B L IN:
Printed by B. C o R c o ^ A v, on the Inn's-quay,

near the Cloifler. M,D.c,LXVI.

# An Address from DAVID HUME, Esq; Author of the History of Great - Britain, &c. to the Rev. Mr. HOME, Author of DOUGLAS, a Tragedy.

[ 3 ]

G0'0 C0030,30QOC',.OC 0O0C OC.eCa

n4 Addjrejf from DAVID HtUME, Efqi Autlor of the
Hi/tot of Great-Britain, &c. to the Riv. M,. HOMS,
duthor, of DouCLA,, a ' ,ta/j,

My dear Sir,
IT was the Practice of the Antients to address their

Conpofitions only to Friends and Equals, and to

reader their Dedications Monuments of Regard and
Affcetion, not of Servility and Flattery. In those Days
of ingenious and candid Liberty, a Dedication did Ho-
nour to the Person to whom it was addressed, without
degrading the Author. If any Partiality appeared to-
wards the Patron, it was, at leaf, the Partiality of
Friendship and Affection.

Another Instance of true Liberty, of which antient
Times can alone afford us an Example, is the Liberty
of Thought, which engaged Men of Letters, however
different in their abitrac Opinions, to maintain a mu-
tual Friendship and Regard; and never to quarrel about
Principles, while they agreed in Inclinations and Man-
nets. Science was often the Subjec of Disputation,
never of Animosity. Cicero, an Academic, addresscd
his philosophical Treatises, fonietiines to Brutus, a Stoic;
foineriines to Atticus, an Epicurean.

I have heen seized with a itrong Desire of renewing
there laudable Plratices of Antiquity, by addrelling the
following Differrations to you, my good Friend: For
Iuch I will ever call and elteeii you, notrithilanding
the Opposition which prevails between us,with Regard
to mnanyI o our speculative Tenets. Thele Differances
o Opinion I have only found to enliven our Converta-
on; while our common Paflion for Science and Letrrrs
rerved as a Cement to our Frientlihip. I still admirtce
your Genius, even w hen I imagined that you lay un,-er
thelnfluence of Prejudice ; and you lometiines told iine,
that you excused my Errors,on account of the Cantulr
and Sincerity, which you thought accompanied them.

But to tell Truth, it is less my Admiration of your
fiteGenius,which has engaged me to make this Addre's

A z to

[ 4 1
[41

to vou, than rmy Efleein of yourCharacer and my As-
fiction to your 'erfon. That Generoliy otf Mind which
ever accompanies you; that Cordiality of Friendlhip;
that spirited Honour and Integrity, have long interefled
me ilrongly in your Behalt, and have tladen me desirous,
that a Monument of our mutual Amity Ihould be pub-
licklv erected, and, if pollible, be preserved to l'oterivy.

I own too, that I have the Ambition to be the firlt

v.ho shall in public exprets his Admiration of your noble
Tragedy of Douglas; one of the nmoR interesting and
pathetic Pieces, that was ever exhibited on anyTheatre.
Should I give it the Preference to the Merope of Massei,
and to that of Voltaire, which it refenibles in its subjea;
hfould I affirm, that it contained more Fire and Spirit
than the former, more Tenderness and Simplicity than
the latter; I might be accused of Partiality: And how
could I entirely acquit myself, 'after the Professions of
Friendihip which I have made you ? But the unfeigned
Tears which flowed from every Eye, in the numerous
Representations which were made of it on this Theatre;
the unparallelled Command, which you appeared to
have over every Affecion of the human Brealt: Theft
are inconteflible Proofs,thatyou poflcfa the true theatic
Genius of Shakefpear and Otway, refined from the un-
happy Barbarism of the one, and Licentiousness of the
other.

My Enemies you know, and I own even sometimes

my Friends, have reproached me with the Love of Pa-
radoxes and fiigulat Opinions; and I expect to be ex-
posed to the fame Imputation, on account of the Cha-
ratter, which I have here given of your Douglas. I hall
he told, no doubt, that I had artfully cholen the only
''ime,when this high ELiceen of that Piece could be re-
gatded as a Paradox, to wit, before its Publication; and
that not being able to contradiA in this Particular the
Sentiments of the Public, I have, at leall, resolved to go
before them. But I Ihall be amply compensated for all!
thele Plealtntries, if you accept this 'Tellimony of my
Regard, and believe nme to be, with the greatell Since-
lity, Dear Sir, Your nollt atfetionate Friend, and huam-
ble Servant,

Edinb Jan 3, 17c, DAV H

# Copy of the Admonition and Exhortation by the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of January, 1757.

Ctpy of the Admonlition and Exhortation Ay tle Reverend

prefhytery of Edinburgh, dated the 5th Day of Ja-
nuarv, 1757.
T H E Presbytery taking into their serious Confider-

ation, the declining State of Religion, the open

Profanation of the Lord's Day, the Contenpt of public
Worlhip, the growing Luxury and Levity of the present
Age; in which so many seem Lovers of Pleasure, more
than Lovers of God: And being particularly affeced
with the UNPRECEDENTED COUNTENANCE given of
late to the Playhouse in this Place,when the State of the
Nation, and the Circumstances of the Poor, make such
hurtful Entertainments still more pernicious ;judged it
their indifpenfible Duty to express in the moot open and
solemn Manner, the deep Concern they feel on this Oc-
cafion.

TheOpinion which the Chrifian Church has always

entertained of StagePlays and Players, as prejudicial to
the IntereRs of Religion and Morality, is well known
and the fatal Influence which they commonly have on
the far greater Part of Mankind, particularly the youn-
ger Sort, is too obvious to be called in Quelfion.

To enumerate how many Servants, Apprentices, and
Students ia different Branches of Literature, In tne City
and Suburbs, have been reduced from their proper Bu-
finess, by attending the Stage, would be a painful, dif-
agreeable Talk.

The Pre(bytery in the Year 1727, when confifling of
many pious, prudent, and learned Minifterswhofe Praise
is in all the Churches, being aware of there Evils, did
prepare a Paper, which was read from the several Pul.
pits within their Bounds, warning their People against
the dangerous Infection of theTheatre then erected there.

In the Year 1737, the Legillature, in their greatWif-

dom, did, by an Atl of the loth of Geotge II. enaf and
declare, ' That every Person who (hould, for Hire or
' Reward, a&, or cause to be afted, any Play, or other
' Entertainment of theStage,without the special Licence
' and Authority mentioned in the laid At, Ihould be
' deemed a Rogue and a Vagabond, and for every such

Offence (hould forfeit the Sum of 5oi. Sterling.'
At thatTime a Projec was set on Foot to obtain a li-

cenfed

6 ]

cenfed Theatre in this City; but the Masters and Profef-
fors of the Inivcrfity, supported by the Magittrates hav-
ing prepared a Petition, letting forth the dangerousTen-
dency of a Playhouse here,with refpec to the important
Interests of Virtue andLeirnin gtheYrojet was laid aside.

The Players, however, being so audacious as to con-

tinue to at in Defiance of the Law, the Presbytery did,
at their own Charge, prosecute them before the Court
of SelTion; and prevailed in the Process. The Players
were fined in Terms of Law; and Warrants being issued
for apprehending them, they fled from Justice. But o-
thers came in their Place; who since that Time have at-
tempted to elude the Law, by changing the Name of the
PLAYHOUSE into that of the CoN cE RT-H ALL.

As such a flight Evasion, th' mere Change of a Name,

could not make the fialleft Variation in the Nature of
theThing,thePrefbytery continued to do all in theirPow.
er, and in their Sphere, to prevent the growing Evil;
and think themselves at this Time loudly called upon,
in ONE BODY, and with oNE VOTICE, to expoftulate,in
the Bowels of Love and Compaflion, with all, under
their Care and Infpelion.

When our gracious Sovereign, attentive to th-iVoice

of Proid.r. .is calling from theThrone to Humiliation
and Prayer, how unfeenly is it for his Subjecs to give
thelifelves up to Mirth and Jollity ? When the War in
which we are engaged and many awful.Tokens of the
divine Displeasure, bespeak us, in the Language of an in-
spired Writer, to redeem the Time, because the Days are
svil, Ihould thatTi ime be squandered away in running the
constant Round of foolish, not to fay sinful Ainufements?
When theWants and Cries of the numerous Poor require
extraordinarySupplies, how unaccountable is it to lavilh
away vail Sums for such vain and idle Purposes ? When
the Wisdom of the Nation has guarded the Inhal'itants
of this City and Suburbs from the Infeoion of the Stage,
by a plain and cxprels Statute ; is it not a high Inflance
of Folly, to break down that Barrier, and open a Door
with their own Hands for theatrical Representations?
which are in many Relperas no le's inconfillent with
good Policy, than unfriendly to Religion; and will be
found sooner or later, to affect their temporal as well a'
ipiritual Interelts. O

[ 7 3

On there Accounts, and for many other obvious and
,eighty Considerations, the Presbytery, warlned with
iut concern for the Good of Souls, do, in the Fear of
God, wARN, EXHORT, and OBTEST, all within their
Bounds, as they regard the Glory of God, the Credits
our holy Religion, and their own Welfare, to walk w
thv of theVocation wherewith they are called, by shew-
ing a sacred Regard to the Lord's Day, and all the Or-
dinances of divine Institution ; and by discouraging, in
their refpeaive Spheres, the illegal and dangerous En-
tertainnments of the Stage.

The Preibytery would plead with ALL in Authority,
withTEAcH ERs of Youth, PA RENTs, and MAST ERS of
Families, to restrain by every habile Method, such as
are under their Influence, from frequenting these Semi-
naries of Folly and Vice. They would particularly be-
feech the younger Part of their Flock, to beware, left,
iy Example. or from a foolish Desire of appearing in the
taliionable World, they be minfed into such pernicious
Snares; Snares which must necessarily retard, if not en-
tirely mar, that Progress in the refpetive Parts of their
Education,on which their future Uferflnefs and Success,
depend. And lastly, they would intreat and obtest Per-
sons of all Ranks and Conditions, that instead of contri-
buting to the growing Licentiousness of the Age, they
may diltinguilh thenfelves hy flining as Lights in the
\Vorld, being blamelef» and harnilefs, the Sons of God,
without Rebuke, in the nidft of a crooked and preverfe
Nation; OCCUPYING, for the great Purpores of the
Honour of God and the Good of Mankind, that Time,
that Substance, and those other Talents which they
have received from their Lord and Malter.

On the whole, the Presbytery do, in the most earnest
Manner, call upon all who have the Interest of Religion
at He-irt, to plead fervently at the Throne of Grace,
in the prevailing Name of th% great Mediator, untilthe
Spiiit be poured upon usfrom on high, and the FIildernefs
He t fruitful Field, and the fruitful Field be countedfor a
Forrli: 7ThenJutdgmentJlall dwell in the IYildernefs, and
Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field; and the Work
of Rigbteou'nerf Jball be Peace, and the Effei of Righte-
olujnef, tieitneJ' and Afurance for e'cer.

The

# Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Presbytery of Glasgow, dated the 14th Day of February, 1757.

[8]
[ 8 ]

The Prefbvtery appoint this AD o T I o N and Ex-

HORTATION to be read from all the Pulpits within
their Bounds, on the last Sabbath, being the thirtieth
Day of this Month, immediately after divine Service
before Noon.
Copy of the Declaration of the Rev. Prejbytery of Glf-

gow, dated the 4/th Day of February, 1 757.

HE Presbytery of Glasgow having seen a printed
Paper, intitled, an Admonition and Exhortation

of the Reverend Presbytery of Edinburgh, which, a-
mong other Evils prevailing, laments the extraordinary
and unprecedented Countenance given of late to the
Playhouse in that City; and having good Reason to
believe, that this refers to the following melancholy
but notorious Fats, that one who is a Minister in ;he
Church of Scotland did himself write and compose a
Stage-Play, intitled, The Tragedy of Douglas, and got it
to be acfed at the Theatre at Edinburgh ; and that he,
with several other Ministers of this Church, were pre-
sent, and some of them oftener than once, at the acting
of the said Play before a numerous Audience: The
Prelbytery being deeply affected with this new and
firange Appearance, think it their Duty to declare, as
they hereby do, that they agree with the Prelbytery of
Edinburgh in their Sentiments with refpec to Stage-
plays; and particularly that such Entertainments, from
what has been ufuallyexhihited in them, and also from
the dilfolute Lives (for the most part) and infamous Cha-
raEters of the Players, have been looked upon by the
Chriitian Church in all Ages, and of all different Com-
munions, as extremely prejudicial to Religion and Mo-
rality, as well as hurtful to the other valuable IntereRs
of human Society, by the waftetfil Expence of 'Money
and Time they have occasioned ! and being convinced
by long Experience, a sure Test of the Tendency of a-
ny Acion or Practice, how vain it is to expect tuch a
Reformation of the Stage as is confident with the Ends
aforesaid ; and therefore such Entertainments (hould be
discouraged and laid aside : And the P'relbytery further

confidering,

L 9 ]

consiiering, that the unprecedented Countenance given
,ro th P.av--houlc. in the Inliance .nentioned, is greatly

sra\a tecd Iy a i ate Act ot Piarliaienr, rendering the

s.i. (bhcc..tui nor lic'ntled) unlawliul in Scotlandl, and
!ilo trom the ple"'nt Circumlltainces of the NaRion with
rgi trd tl' t V\ a! we :re en aged in, the Dearth of
I'vii.)ns, and the awful 1'oklns of the divine Anger
a .iint us : Thev theretore hereby apoint and inllruct
luch of their \Iellinerc as hlail rcprelent them in the
cnlu:.W, e;1'-r:'! All'-llullv of this Church, to move and
nli't i'l . i ceula :\li nner, l:hat the venerable AfTlinbly
,:o ieclare, b na publick ACt, their Judgment and that
ot this irltiol.il Church, againit the Entertainments of
the T'he itre, as- o' very hurtful Tendency to the Inter-
tris of Religion and Society. zdlv, That the Affeinbly
do ltrhitiv enquire whether the Faats above-uiei:tioned,
<'. that a llinitler ot' this Church has coinpofcd and
prj.:ure.t to be acted on the 'ne.itre of the Canongate
or' Edinburgh, the Tragedy cilied Douglas, and that
the Reprdfeniiattion of the taid ftiagedy was attended
bv himi ani several other Miniliers, have been under
the Consideration of the Preftb)ters respectively con-
erned ; and w iether theilfe initers, having been
tbund guilty, ihv;e leen cenllured as their Faults delelrv-
eJ ; and to give such Directior. as they in their Wis-
dill Ihall li:ill nCielCtry, that luci Minillers andl il o-
thers nma v be fi:nlihie that the Church of Scotland will
never protect her Mellinbers in a Ilialice so unlbtcoming
their Character, and of luch pernicious Teinleii.y to
the great Inteletis of Religion, Industry and V\irrie.
And l.ly, that tha e Atllelbly would use their best En-
lic;tiours to obtain luch an Explication and L[nlirce-
ment ot the Act o the i7th of (ieo. II. anent the l'la\-
houlb, as it ii.iv not Ihe liallc to the pi.ifli! lva fio;.z
by wiicli it is Ino'. eluded.

B D R ? \

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS PERSON F.

LONDON. EDINBURGH. DUBLIN.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. RIDOUT. Mr. YOUNGER. Mr. DEXTER.
GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH. Mr. LOVE. Mr. STAYLEY.
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY. Mr. DIGGS. Mr. SHERIDAN.
STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS. Mr. HAYMAN. Mr. LEE.
SERVANTS.

\ M E N.
MATILDA, Lady RAN-} Mrs. WOFFINGTON. Mrs. WARD. Mrs. KENNEDY

DOLPH, M
ANNA, Mrs. VINCENT. Mrs. HOPKINS. Miss G. PHILIPS.

# ACT I.

## SCENE I. The court of a castle surrounded with woods.

DOUGLAS:

A

TRAGE DY.
ooe0 wo ; stoooooc osooooaotco

A C T I.
SCENE I. The court of a caRle surrounded witb woods.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

YE woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom.
y Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewel a while: I will not Leave you long;
For in your (hades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who trom the chiding Pfream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and arkfwers to MATILDA'S moan.
ODou L A ! DOUGLAS! If departed ghotts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the paflion of immortals hear'lt
Aly lamentation: hear'lt thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
*Mv brother's timeless death I seem to mourn.
V ho pernili'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee 1 lift my voice ; to thee addrels
Tbe plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
0 disregard me not; though I anm call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine .
Incipable of change, affecion lies
3uried, my DoUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom tfte has made my .onrd,
lo chide my anguish, and defraud the dead,

B z E'te-

Fnrr .ortId lk N r ri) i
l.ord P,.n. A'gu'i tl-.e. :\cris o! v.ce' sav, i.uI:

t!: '.u :vctf

To tefd :1 paflkin k li lh] cronflunlle thy lifi ?
'1 e

i ;ir cIt.it, rilo l c liuty ; :lvainly thou
B, flov'il thr , :,res upon the fileit dle.ad

' adJv Ran Silcnt, .1::- ' i he tior hom I mourr

Ch;idltis, without mni-i:or;al ot i i nanme,
He only now in my re;netlll!rance lives.

Lord Ran Time, that wears our the trace of deepest

anguish,

Has past o'er thee in vain. Wou'd thou ei't not
Conipos'd ofgriefand tenderness alone !
Sure thou ate not the daughter of Sir lMAtLCOLM:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS son in the :ime field was (lain.

L.adv Ran. Oh! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:

Implacable lefentmlent was their crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the Dou c LAS, gallarnt lives
()ftither houle were loll ; my ancellors
(ol. pI ll'd, at lair. to lta\ e their ancient feat
On '1 iviot's plealant h'.iks ; and now, of themi
No heir is let. Hadt tht-y not been so stern,
I hnd not been tie lafi of all my race.

L.ord KR,,. Thy griel'w Iclts to its purpofcs my words
I n. vtr alk'il o( thel tl',,t ardent love,

M hich in the hrcall,: ot fanr 's children burns

lDecent alcd.tinr.s, annd cii'inl.cent kindnef.i
Vv etc all I \%il','.i lt ; lin 1 [ xilli'd in di).
th>n;ce with thl- I-'i. rcgrct my eyes behold
'I 'e ilorii ot war ;hat ganrih s o'er tli.i lalld:
If 1 liuuldl pcril .v the Danilh Iword,
I/lV r . n v.

n 't,ll not tfhed one '1 e;r the nlore.

1 .addv /Ra,. T'ho; do'lt not diink Io;: woclil as I am

1 love thly nmeit. and ellecini thy virtues.
Blit \v hither toell thou now >

Lord Ran. Straight to the camp.

W hele eveyv warrior on the tip-toe stands
Ot'expeclation, and impatient asks.
Each who artives, if he is come to tell

The

The Danes are landed.

Lady Ran. 0, may adverse winds,

I'ar from the coalt of Scotland,drive their fleet'
\lnd every soldier of both holls return
In peace and lafety to his pleasant home!
Lord Ran. Thou rpeak'tt a woman's, hear a v artior'a

witll:

Right from their native land, the ftornmv north,
lar the wind blow, till every keel is six'd
limuloveable in Caledonia's llraid !
I'hen (hall our toes repent their bold invalion.
*\nd roving armies (hun the laial fhole.

Lady Rl,m. War 1 detett: but war with foreign soe.i,

\Vh'ioe manners, language, and whole looks are Uira e:.,
1 nor so horrid, nor to me so hatelul,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage
A river here, there an ideal line
Bv fancy drawn, divides the fiier kingdonm
On each fide dwells a people ftililar,
Ai twins are to each other, vjliant both,
loth tfor their valour tamous thro' the world
Yet xwill they not unite their kindred aims.
.\ui, if they mult have war, wage dilli tr ar,
Hut with each other fight in cruel conflit..
Gallant in lirife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their paflime. 'Ihey go forth
Gay in the ilorniint, as to luttuillel ports
\\ hen ev'ning comes the glory of the mnorn.
The youthlul warrior, is a clod ot clay.
Thus fall the prinec of'either haplet land;
,And such the Iruitof Scutch and Englilh v.arI,

l.ord Ran. I'll hear no muore : this melody m ould iiak!e.

A flldier drop his sword, und dott' hi; arls,
Sitdown and weep the conquelts he has aude;
Yea, (like a monk,) sing reft and peace in heav'n.
To !ouls of warriors in his battle fain.
Lady, farewel: I leave thee not alone
Yonder comies one whole love makes duty light.

Enter AN N A,

Alnnar. Forgive the ralhnels ofyoutr '

Urg'd by afi'eCiol, I have thus pli
lo interrupt your solitary thougiht

Bj

And warn you of the hours that you neglet,
And lore in sadness.

Lady Ran. So to lose my hours
Is all the use I with to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my late

But sure I am, since death firit prey'd on man,
Never did fitler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady Ran. Oh!
Anna. Have 1 diftrelt you with officious love.

And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate?
Forgive me, lady humble tho' I am,
The mind I bare partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently 1 love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady Ran. What power direced thy unconscious

tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name

Anna. I know not:

But since my words have made my niitrefs tremble,.
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
Mly tears with hers.

Lady Ran. No, thou shalt not be silent.

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou Ihalt be
Henceforth th' infiru&ed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never ebbing time ?
Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive?

Jnna. What means my noble mistress ?
Lady Ran. Didft thou not a(k what had my fortows

been ? ,

If in early youth had loft a husband ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the hulband of tny youth ;
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his. --

Anna. O ! lady, imoft rever'd I

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold,

Lady Ran. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary

Hereditary evil, was the source '
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed.
That my brave brother should in battle save-
The life of DoUGLAS' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendlip.
To tee the vaunted sifter of his friend
Impatient, Do UGLAS to Balarto came,
Under a borrow'd natpe-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
Mly brother's pretence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of downs.
Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was caJl'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALco.LM. go.
Scarce were they gone, when my tlern fire was told
That the false stranger was lord DouGLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And queftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint.
Kneeling beneath his sword, falt'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DoucLAs' name, Sincerity,
Thou fitit of virtues, let.nomortal leave
Thy onward path! altho' the earth should gape,
Ar:d from the gulf of helldeftruaion cry
To t.' k dissimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth so hardy I

Laxiy Ran. The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.-
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were lain.
Mly lord! miy life I my husband 1-,mighty God I
What had I done to merit such affliction ?

Atn. My dearet lady I Many a tale of tears

I've lilten'd too; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Laly Ran. In the firfl days

Ot l:y iiltlating grief, I found myself---
As .\ oi n will to be who love their lords.
But who durt tell my fathel ? The good priest
'ho join'd out hands, my brother's ancient tutor,

With

\With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell
They two alone were privy to the marriage,
On lilence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time shauld make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which nmy son was born,
My nurse, the only confident I had,
Set out with him to reach her fitlle's House
But nurle, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, Ax \ A, since that fatal hour.
AMv murder'd child !-lhad thy fond mother sear'd
The lots of thee, she had loud fame defv'd,
Uefpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wantder'd with ti.ecrhro the scorning world

Anna Not seen, or hieard of' then perhaps lie lives.
Lady Ran. No. It was dark December : wind and rain

Had heat all night Acrotl the Carton lay
The deiii', road ; anu in it's swelling flood
My faithful lervant perilii'd with my child.
0 hap pcs on ! of a miort hap!efs fire --
But they are both at relt ; and 1 alone
Dwell in this world of v oe, condeinn'd to walk,
l.ike a gtiilt-troub!'d gholt, niv painful rounds:
Nor has dc!pitet'ul ;ate permitted ime
The comfort of a. fuliary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was conipell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me front a villain's arms;
And I ANDO II' t now pofffires the douinilns,
That by Sir Ml LCO. Ml's death on me devolv'd;
Domaini n,that lhould to DOUGLAS' son have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my loothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd tather of a son unborn.
And when that son came, like a ray from hcav'n,
Which fhinesand disappears; alas! my child!
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, the knew not how, reltoi'd'
Year alter year hath worn her hope away
But left fill undiminifh'd her desire.

,'nna. The bard that Ip'rs th' uneven thread of life,
MA v fn.outh the length that's yet to conie of your's.

Lidy Ran: No; in this wot l : I have tOrlfider'd well
It's variouus vils, and on whon they fall.

AIlc!

.\'ast how oft does goodness wound itielf?
And Iwveet affettion prove the Ipring of woe.
)! had I died when my lov'l husband tell!
Had tone good angel op'd to rme the hook
o1 providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum

I1 ills, which one by one I have endur'd.
fnna. That God, whose minitlers good angels are,
Hatl-lhut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we must leave this theinle: GLE ALVON comes:
I law him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady Ran. I will avoid him. An ungracious person

Is doubly ilkfome in an hour like this.
Anna. Why speaks ny lady thus of RANDOLPH'

heir?
Lady Ran. Because he's not the heir of RA N D OLr I'

virtues.

Su.tle and shrewd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Of different men, it's features. Self-denied,
And master of his appetites he seems:
But lhi fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
W\.tcles to leize unseen the wifh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,
As inGLE NALVON'S unrelenting iind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
Anid sands aloft in these unruly tines.
Why I delcribe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay and detain him till I reach the castle.

[Exit. Lady R A oL P H.

.4nna. 0 happiness ! where art thou to he found ?

I lee thou dwelielt not with birth and beauty.
'Iho' grac'd with grandeur, and in wealth arrav'd:
Ncr (!olt thou, it wou! l Ice', , t!i virtue dwell;
Llii had this gentle lady nii(s'd-thee not.

iSnter G LEN A I.VO N.

G!en. What doit thou mule on, meditating maid ?

Like fonme entranc'd and visionary Ieer
On earth thou flilld'll, thy thoughts alcend to heaven.

Anna. Wou'd that I were, c'en as thou fay'd, a leer,

'o

To have my doubts by heav'nly vision clear'd!

Glen. What dost thou doubt of ? what haft thou to do

With fubjees intricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be questioned: think of these good gifts ?
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

Anna. Let women view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty: who so fair as the ?
But I mull follow: this revolving day
Awakes the memory of her ancient woes. [Exit Anna.

GLENALVON /faus.

So!-Lady RANDOLPH shuns me; by and by

I'll woo her as the lion does his brides.
The deed's a doing now, that makes melord
Of these rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The season is molo apt; my founding steps
Will not be heard amidtt the din of arms.
RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd unknown: a slender consolation !
Heaven is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvelt. Yet I am not safe:
By love, or something like it, Rlung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my paflion to his wife,
And the has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the mian
Who Rands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar hut he; ihe has no kinfiann near,
No brother in his filler's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous raise, a liranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy G( .i NA LVO N.

ACT

# ACT II.

## SCENE I. A Court, &c.

A C T II.

S C E N E I. ACourt,&c.
Enter servants and a stranger at one door, and Lady

RAN DOLPH and ANNA at another.
Rady Ran. W T HAT means this clamour ? stranger,

WV speak secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd ? have these rude men prefun'd
To vex the weary traveller on his way ?

1ti Serv. By us no stranger ever fuffer'd wrong:

This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH and young man, with their

swords drawn and bloody .
Lady Ran. Not vain the stranger's fears! how fares

my lord ?
Lord Ran. That it fares well, thanks to this gallant

youth,

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death!
As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At he cross way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPH low,
Had not this brave and generous firanger come,
Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him ; but his ative arm
Srruck to the ground, from whence they role no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him master of the bloody feld.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH ; upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleating to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady Ran. My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel

My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to his noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Not paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide against such fearful odds.

Have

Have you yet learn'd of hin whom we liould thank
Whom call the saviour of Lord RAN DODPH'S life?

Lord Ran. I alk'd that queltion, and he anfwer'd not:
But I mull know who my deliv'rer is. (to the St',anger)

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

Who nought can boast but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arns.

Lord Ran. Whoe'er thou are, thy Ipirit is ennobled

By the great King of Kings! thou are ordain'd
And fIamipt a hero by the lovereign hand
Of nature! blulh not, flower of iiudetty
As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

Strang. Aly name is No .v A L : on the Grampian hills

My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose conllant cares were to encreafe his (tore,
And keep his only son, myvlelfat home.
For I had heard of battles, anJ I long'd
To follow to the field fosme warlike lord;
And heaven soon granteu what my fire denied.
This moon which rose lath night, round as my shield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A hand ot fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rulh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled,
For lafety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended how, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hailed to my friends:
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing The pursuit I led,
Tillwe o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and con(luei'd. Ere a Iword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now 1 wear.
Returni g homel in triumph, I dildain'd
The lhepherd's llolhfil life ; and haing heard
'I hat our good king had lullllon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carrion fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my steps:-

ron tre nbling coward who totlook his m:nltrr.
Journeying with this intent, I palt there towers,

And,

And, heaven direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord Ran. He is as wife as brave. Was ever tale

With such a gallant modetly rehears'd ?
My bravv deliverer! thou shalt enter now
.A nsblcr lilt. and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes ior the prize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottish king,
Whole valiant Ipirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha! my MAT L nA ! wherefore starts that tear?

Lady Ran. I cannot fay: for various affections,
And Itrangely mingled in my boolbti swell;
Yet each of thetm may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fottunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obfure and t iendlefs, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain dillinction which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have perifh'd,
And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now gr2c'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He lands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his (word.
On this my mind refleaed, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord Ran. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts.
My deeds Ihall follow where thou point'ft the way!
Next to myfelf,and equal to GLCN ALVON,
In honour and command {hall No RV A L be.

iVorv. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In Ipeech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my lord,
There's Something in my breast which makes me bold
To fay, that NORVAL ne'er will Ihame thy favour.

Lady Ran, I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou (halt be
My knight; and ever, as thou didft to day,
With happy valour guard the life of RAN DOLPH.

Lord Ran. Well hall thou spoke, Let me forbid reply.

[To No v IL.
We are thy debtors still; thy highdefcrt

C O'ertops

## SCENE II.

O'ertops our gratitude. I must proceed,
As was at tirft intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I fee are fpe:.!ing hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord', delay.
Go v ith me, NORVAL, and chine eyes tla'l fee
The chosen warriors ofthy native land.
\hlio languilh for the fight, and beat the air
With brandifh'd swords.

Ncrv. Let us be gone, mv lord.
Lord Ran. [To Lait R. AN DULPH. . About the time.

that the declining fun

Shall his broad orhit o'ei yon hills suspend,
Exped us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I relt ; my tent I pitrh
To-morrow in the tieli!. Prepare the icalt.
Free is his heart who tfr his country ights :
He in the eve of battle may resign
Hinmfelf to social pleasure ; (wee:tft then,
\W hen danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt IRANDOLPI nnnso RVAL.

SCENE II.

Lady RA N r o . P and A ,' ..

Lady Ran. His parting words have firuck a f'tal truth.

O DoUGLAS! DoUGLAS ! tencr v.as the time
Wheh we two parted, ne'er to mncet again !
How miany years ofanguilh and dlefpair
Has hcav'n annex'd to thotf Ifwlt palling hours
Of love and fondness ! Then my bo!bom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of tear,
Rcturn'd, and with redoubled ardour blaz'd.

Anna. May gracious heacvn pour tl,e fwect balin of

peace

Irto the wounds that feRler in your breat !
For earthly conollation cannot cure them.

Lady Ran. One only cure can hcav'n itfclfbellow;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary ref.
Wretch that I am! Alas! why aml I lo ?
At every happy parent I repine!
How blest the mother ofyon gallant NORVAL !
She for a living hulband born her pains,

And

And heard hnm blelf her when a man was born:
Sih nurs'd her fiMiling in'aint on her breaf ;
Tcn!e 1'he ch1ill. and rear'd the plc.iting ox ,
SI . wirth .tf.-tl;n's riuitph, law the youth
]) arace :inl co.i I 'ncf lifrpals his peers:
\. 'i,1. I to , d, .:i; !-lib t n bore a ton,
.\I,: to tih' to Irinn watlcs gave 11,' child,

»)i :\!As! .s is.! w'iy will you thus resume

Y(,ur grirl Aiefnl I thought. thtt gallant youth
\\ould tor a while have won you friom your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
.Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'il on other objects to bellow.
Lady Ran. Delighted fay'if thou ? Oh! even there

mine eye

Found tuel for my life-confuning sorrow.
I thought, that had the son of DOUGLAS liv'd,
He might have been like thisyoung gallant tiranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in shape:
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
My boy with blooming NORVAL tmight have nuniber'd.
Whillk thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On ny fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young firanger, wand'ring from his home,
And like an orphan call upon my care.
I will proteCt thee, (said 1 to mnyflf)
\,ith :ll my power, and glace with all my favour.

,ltnna. Sure heav'n willblels l gen'rous a relole.

You mnult, my noble dame, exert your power;
You nmut awake: devices will be Ir.ll'd,
And arrows pointed at the breaf of No RV A...
Lady Ran. G( i E A, .IV ON' lalife .1d crafty head will

work

Agninil a rival in his kinfinan's love,
If deter him not: I only can.
Bold as lie is, Gi.E N ALVON will beware
How he pulls down the fabric that I raile.
I'll be the artill of young NoVA L'S fortune.
'Tis pleasi.ng to admire : moll apt was I
To this affedion in my better days;
Though now I leiu to you flrulnk up, retir'd
Within the narrow compa.ss of my woe.

C z Have

Hlave vou not sometimes seen an early flower
)pen it's bud, and spread it'sfilken leaves,
To catch (v.':et rs, and odours to eeRfow;
Then, bv the keen hli't nipt, pull in it's leaves,
And. tho' still li .ir:,g die to scent anid beauty ?
Emhlem of me! affliction,like a ftorin,
Hath kill'd the forward hloffom of my heart.

Enter GLENALVON.
Glen. Where is my dearelt kinfinan, noble RAN.

DoLPH .
Lady Ran. Have you not heard, GLE N A LVO, oftb

bale-

Glen. I have: end that the villains may not scape,

Wit, i fIlronig band I have begirt the wood:
If they lurk there, alive they Ihall be taken,
And torture force from them th'imnportant secret.
Whether Ionme foe ot RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Orif-

Lady Ran. That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have acounfel for GLN ALVON'S ear, (Exit A NA.)

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lady Ran. I have not found lo: thou art known to

me.

Glen. Known I
Lady Ran. And rnolt certain is my cause of know-

ledge.

Glen. What do you know ? By the most bleffedcrofi,

You much amaze me. No created thing,
Yourfllfexcept, duilt thus accof GLEN ALVO .

Lady Ran. Is guilt so bold? and doll thou makea

merit

Of thy pretended nmeeknes ? This to me,
Who, with a gentlencfs which duty blames,
Have hitherto concral'd what, ifdivulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals shudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind I

Permit me yet to fy,that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond ftritl virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,

Unpitied

## SCENE III.

Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftew'd:
For mortals know that love is till their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady Ran. Reserve these accents for some other ear.

To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou should's.
His brave deliverer RA ND o LP H here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not p!ease thee well:
But, at thy peril, praaife aught again ft him:
Let not thyjealouly attempt to shake
And loosen the good root he hasin RAN DOLPH;
Whose favourites I know thou hall supplanted.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'll pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendlels stranger my protection claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

SCENE III.

Manet GLENALVON.

Child that 1 was, to start at my own shadow,
And be the shallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been; what I lhould be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I Ihould conclude there was an arm above
That fought againdt me, and malignent turn'd,
To catch my self, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means !
Th' imperfet rape to RANDOLPH gave a spouse;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worst of all, a rival. Burning hell:
This were thy center, if thought (he lov'd him !
'Tis certain she contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'et me,
In his behalf. And fIall I thus be brav'd ?

C Curb'd

# ACT III.

## SCENE I A Court, &c. as before.

Cuttb i, as file calls it, hy dame chaffity ?
Intlrnal iends, if any fiends there are

lore fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rile up and fill my booin with vour fires
And policy reiiiorfelefs? Chance may Ipoil
A single aim ; but perieverance mnlft
i'rofper dt lali. For chance and fate are words:
I'Ec:tillive wildoui it the fate of man.
Uarklv a ptoject peers upon my mind,
Like tlit red moon when riling in the eall,
Crol's'd and divided by firange colour'd clouds.
1 leek the flae who came with No RVAL hither,
And tor his cowardice was spurned trom him.
I e know a Iollower's rankled bolbio breed
\'enuiii ioflt fatal to his heedless lord. [Exit.

A C T III.
SC E N E I A Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.
,nna. rHY vassals, Grief! great nature's oyde:

1 break,

/\nd cliange the noon-tide to the iidnight hour.
\W hilt l.adRy RA N DO LI H sleeps I will walk forth,
And tall tlht air that breaths ol yonder bank.
S ect iniw her lulnibers be! Ye ;ninilters
Of gracious heaven who love the hulian race,
Angels ant seraphs who delight in goodnlis'
F'oriake youl Ifics, and to her couch descend!
There from her tancy chafe thole difinal formis
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celeflial, luch as pleale
The bleit above upon their golden beds.

Enter SE RV A N 1'.

Ser.'. One of the vile alrallin s is ecur'l.

\\ tound the villain lurking in the wood:
V\ ith dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge ot the crimt. But this is not
-is lirl1 efliv: these jewels were conceal'd
In the nolf Iecret places of his garment ;
Belike tlhe tpoil out lome that he has niurdcr'd.

Anna.

## SCENE II.

A4nna. Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart.

The chosen crett of DouG.LS' valiant name !
Thele are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit AN A.

Enterjetrvants with a prisoner.

P, if I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

Ift Ser',. You fay lb, Sir!

But torture soon (hall make you speak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RANDOLPH1 comes: 'i,
Prepare yourlelf to meet her jull revenge. "

SCENE II.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Anna Sumnon your utmost tortitude, before
You Ipeak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at stake. Think of the fatal secret,
W\lich in a moment fromn your lips may fly.
Lady Ran. Thou ihalt behold me, with a desperate

heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The prisoner kneels.]
Prif. Heav'n bless that countenance, so sweet and

mild!

A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
0 ltve me, lady ! from these cruel men,
\\ ho have attack'd and seiz'd me ; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at thejudgment feat of God,
'I he tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of iurder.

Lady Ran. Of this man's guilt what proof can ye

produce ?

Ifl Serv. We found him lurking in the hollow Glynn,

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd, he fled.
We overtook hili, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far.
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not satisfied with thij, we fearch'd his cloat#9,
And found these jewels; whose rich value plead
Most powerfilly against him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us to try

11':

His ftubbornefs against the tortune's force.

Prif 0 gentle lady! by your lord's dear life!

Which there weak hands, I swear, did ne're aifail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age!
Let not they iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady Ran. Account for these; thine own they can-

not be:

For these, I fay : be steadfast to the truth;
De. d falsehood is mofl certain death.

-ov^ [ANNA roMtO'es thefcrvants and returrs.]
Prif Alas! I'm fore beset! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin, against his foul!
Eternal justice is in this molt just !
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady Ran. O! ANNA here I-once more I charge

thee speak

The truth direa.; for these to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which it the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you asjuft

As if you were the minister ofheaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land

Of brave Sir MALCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All tbat I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Receiv'd us: there hard labour, and the (kill
In fishing, which was formerly my sport;
Supported life. Whilil thus we poorly liv'd,
One tormny night, as 1 remember well,
The wind and raii, beaL hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down,.andloud and oft
The : ngry fpitit of the water Ihriek'd.
Ar the t'rad hour of night was heard the cry
Ot one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To E here the circling eddy of a pool
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within

My

M, reach whatever floating thing the fiream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft:
But looking fad and earned on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A balket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And nestled curious there an infant lay.

Lady Ran. Was he alive ?
Prif. He was.
Lady Ran. Inhuman that thou art!
How couldst thou kill what waves and tempests spar'd?

r's. I am not so inhuman.
Lady Ran. Didft thou not ?
Anna. My noble miltrefs, you are mov'd too much:
This man has not the aspet of stern murder:
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

Prif. The needy man, who has known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as make the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them.
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, 1 would not
Have touch'd that infant, with a hand of harm.
Lady Ran. Ha I dost thou fay so ? Then perhaps he

lives!

Prif. Not many days ago he was alive
Lady Ran. 0 God of heav'n! Did he then die so

lately ?

Prif. I did not fay he died; I hope he lives:

Not many days ago there eyes beheld
Him, flouriling in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady Ran. Where is he now ?
Prif. Alas! I know not where.
Lady Ran. Ohfatel I fear thee still. Thouriddler.

(peak
Diret and clear; else I will fearcl thy foul'

Anna. Permit me, ever honour'd Keen impatience,

Tho' hard to be reftrain'd, defeats itself,--
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didft keep the child.

Pris.

Prif. Fear not my faith, tho' I nuff speak my fliame.

Within the cradle, where the infant lay,
Was ftow'd a mighty tlore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did relolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our eflate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and finote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he, the stranger, sole remain'd the heir
'Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trusted him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Foreboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the tripling grew in years and beauty?
And, as we oft obferv'd, he bore hinlelf,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the nild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd ofwar and arms.
I ret nivfelfagainft his warlike bent;
But all in vain: for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came-

Ladly Ran. Eternal providencel What is thy name?
P-ri. My name is NORVAL ; and my name he bears
Lady Ran '"is he; 'tis he himself! It is my son!

O fIvereign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw !
No woder, A N N A, that my bolbm burn'd.

Anna. jutl are yourtranfports: ne'er was woman's

hc;art

Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame!
But vet rememnber that you are beheld
By feivile eyes ; your gefrurcs may be seen
Iinpafiron'd,ftrange ; perhaps your wortd' o'er heard.

Lady Ran. Well dost thou counsel, AN N A : Heaven

bestow
On me that wisdom which my state requires!

Anna. The moments of deliberation pass,

And

And soon you must resolve. This useful man
vlult be difiils'd in lafety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

fri If l, auiidft aftonifhmnent and fear,

Have of your words and gettures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient matter
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady Ran. With thee diflimulation now were vain.
I am indeed the daughter of Sir IMALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

Pri. Blest be the hour that made me a poor man!

M.v poverty hath fav'd my master's house!
Lady Ran. Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost

not teign:

The tear flands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir MA LCO LM'S house deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'll the f(ory of thy own dillre's.

Pri. Sir MALCOLM of our barrens was the flower;
The safest friend, the best and kindest nmater.
But ah! he knew not of my fad elfate.
Atier that battle, where his gallant ton,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew desperate and recklels of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heaven so judge me as I judg'd my mailer I
And God so love me as I love his race!
Lady Ran. His race Ihall yet reward thee. On thy

faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd mafier's house.
Reiemllb'relt thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

Pi. I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady Ran. ''is that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
'hWo in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
Till I thall call upon thee todeclatc,

Before

## SCENE III.

Before the king anc, -.ihkl, .hat thou now
To me halt told. No ,.ore but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy fur!re days;
Thy Ion to long lhall call irh'e father frill,
And all the land (hall bleis the mIan, who lav'd
The son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou Jhouldlt meet
Him whom thou call'ft thy son, still call him so,
And mention nothing ot his nobler father.

Pri. Fear not that I (hall mar so fair an harvest,

By putting in my fickle ere 'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him were these jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret ot his noble birth.

[Lady RANDOLPH goes to'wards thefervants.

Lady Ran. This man is not the aflaflin you fufpeaed,

Tho' chance combin'd some likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in haste he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hirher.

[Exeunt Stranger andfervrant.

S C E N E III.

Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady Ran. My faithful AN N A ! dost thou Ihare myjoy?

I know thou doll. Unparrallel'd event I
Reaching from heaven to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my fonl
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's fatherl
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift I What does my ANnA think
Of the youngeaglet ofa valiant nefR ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region ot bis fire.

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy!

Milterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftict, drew you to your own.

Lady Ran. The ready story ofhbis birth believ'd

Suppreft

Sappreft my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness miy so sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaiiient of Do UG LAS. or my own,
But imol of all, I long ro let him know
\\Who his true parents are, to clal'p his neck,
And tell him all the ltory of his lather.

.*,n, \Vith wary caution y )u nuft bear yourself

In pu!,iick, lell 'out tenderness break forth,
Andi in u:lcrvers stir conjecures Rfrange.
For, it a cherub in the Ilhape of woian
S!oiiul wa;lk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron I:arted at your tears.

Lad) Ran. HFe did so, AN N A ! wellthy millrefs knows,
If the leal circunilance, nmote ofolfence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would be
\Vi;h jealoulv diforder'd. But the more
It does behove nme intlant to declare
The birth of DocG LAS, and afiert his rights.
This night I purpose with lly Ion to ineet,
Reveal the secret and conlult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
.s he j2.s now, so look'd his noble father,
Arrav'd in nature's ealt: his mien, his speech,
Were sweetly liii;!g: and full oft deceiv'd
Thole trivial mortals wilt eem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Uprofe the hero on his piercing eye
Sat Obfcrvation ; on each glance of though;
Decilion toilow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flafl.

,nna. 'I'hat denon hunts you fill
BeholIGLEN ALVON.

Lady Ran. Now I shun him not.

This day I brav'd hiin in behaloil' No nv A ;
Perhaps too far: at letal Imy niceflt: fals
ForDouGLAS thus interplet,

EnitepFGLENALV ON.

Glen. Noble dame !
The hov'ring Dane at lalt his men hath landed

D No

No band of pirates ; but a i;iLh., O' o,.
That come to fettle where thci -'!our; ccu i.s .
To win a country, or to lose themifelves.

Lady Ran. But whence comes this intelligencCi, t.,,-

NALVO ?

Glen. A nimble courier sent from yonder camp,

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
lnform'd me, as he past, that the fierce Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothisn landed,
Near to that place where the tea-rock imniienfe,
Amazing Bal's, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady Ran. Then must this wedlern army march tojoin
The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

Glen. Beyond all question. If impairing time

Has not eftfc'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
Which lyes to westward of that mighty rock,
And feemns by nature formed for the camp
Of water wafted armies, whole chief strength
L.ies in firm foot, unflank'd w ith warlike iorfe
It'martial (kill direc.s the Danilh lords,
There inacccffible their army lies
To our swift fcow'ring horse, the bloody field
Mvlult man to man, and foot to foot, he tought.

Lady Ran. Ilow many mothers llall hewail their Ions!
-low manvn widows weep their hull)andis lin
Ye dailes of Denmark ! ev'i tbr \',u I ('Il,
Who, sadly fitting on the ea-' c.r r-.nre
Long lokl lor lords that ni .Cr fIl'l lettrrn

(Glc/. Oft has th' un'-)nc( ':r't Ll,

r..I ,:n fv.or.l

W\idow'd the north, '1e ii : :11 ,,i 't. ain
Come, as I hope, to nmeet t!:cir t.:t!,r ,' t..c.
The monltei war, \ ith li.r inftern t 1 I.r-,J,
Loud ytl'ir ,g urv, and life-cenOhyI , i i,
Are ohjets luited to Gt.ENAI.1 ,;..'5 toil.
Scorn is more grievous than thle p.iis of death:
Reproach, miore pieicing thnn tl.c pointed fwordi.

Lady Ran. I scorn thee m.);, but \*ien I ought to

scorn;

Nor e'cr reproaclh But whnr infulred virtuc
Against audatious vice allerts herlfell.
I own thy worth, G L E N A L v c N' ; InorC n1ore apt

Than

Than I to praifc thine eminence in arnii.
And be the echo of thy martial ftae.
No longer vainly feed a guilty pallion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, glory,
Upon the Danish crests redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the Ihield of R, N Do . P t.

Glete. One instant stay, and he:r an altsr'd man.

When beauty pleads tor virtue, vice abalh'd
Flies it's own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I ami your convent; time will Ihew how truly:
Yet one immediate proof I mcan to giv.
That youth tor whoim your ardent -zeai to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, dely'd youl Iliae,
A;.idt't the flock oi armies I'll delend,
And turn death from himi, with a guardian nl ll.
Sedate by ule, my 1bolf: ti;dt !c.:.; not
At the tumultous uproir f ti:e lti: l.

Lady Ran. At thu=, GLUNaLVaN, ani; I a.1: !,y

friend:

But that's thy least reward. Believe me, fir,
The truely generous is the truely wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

Exit Lady RA N n o t. r t.

Glen. [Solus.] Amen ! and virtue is its own reward!--

I think that I have hit the very tone
In which the loves to speak. Hpney'd aifent,
how plealing art thou to the tafle of man,
And woman allb ! flattery dired
Rarely dilgulls. 'hey little know mankind
Who doubt it's operation: 'tis my key,
And opes the wicked ot the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now I know not.
Yet I incline to think her lloriny virtue
Is lull' awhile: 'tis her alone I tear.
Whiltl Ihe and RAN DOLrPtH live,and live in faith
And ainity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head lulpends dilgrace and death,
Bly that weak hair, a peevilh femalc'a will.
I an not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of tortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave ofNoRvA .'s I have t'ound l0oft apt:
I Ihew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his Ibul

1D z To

# ACT IV.

## SCENE I. Flourish of Trumpets.

To fay and swear whatever fuggeet.
NORVAI., 1'1n told, has that alluring look,
'Tw ixt inan and woiman, which I have obferv'd
To cliar-n the nicer and fantaftick damles,
\V'!ih are, like lady RA I)O. I.PH, full of virtue.
In raiin:g RA N 1OI.P IH'S jealou t, I mnay
I'ut point him to the truth. He feldoio errs
W\ho thinks the worll he can of womnankind,

A CT 1V.
S C E N E I. Flourifi, of Trumpets.

Enter Lord R A N D . P 11 attended.
Lord Ran. U.:nlmon an hundred horse, by break of

S (Iday,
To wait our pleasure at the carle gate.

Enter Lady R ?A D O 1. P 1.
Ladv Ran. Alas! my lord! I've heard unwelcome

Newt;
The Danes pre landed.

Lord Ran. Ay, no inroad this
1' the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament effal,
Otf foie young knight ret'olv'd to break a spear,
And l:iin with holile blood his maiden arns.
The Danes are landed: we inuft beat them back,
Or live the flives of Denmark.

Lady Ran. Dreadful times !
l.ord Ran. 'he fencele's villages are all forsaken;

The trembiling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and caltles; whilit the men
Retire indignant. Yet, like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady Ran. Ilmienfe, as fame reports, the Danish hot !
Lord Ran. Were it as num'rous as loud fame reports,

An army knit like ours wou'd pierce it thro':
Brothers, that Ihrink not from each others fide,
And fond comipanions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The hulband the teailels tather nrm.
In vulgar breads heroic ardor burns,

And

And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.
Lady Ran. Men's minds are temper'd, like their

swords, tor war: s

Lovers of danger, on deftrution's brink
They joy to rear erect their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
W\here is our gallant guelt ?

Lord Ran. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
\Whose stubbornness had toil'd the firength and l:ill
Otfevery rider. But behold he comies,
In arnell conversation with GL E N .\ LVO N.

Enter No RVAL and GLE ALVo N.

GLENALVON ! with the lark arile; go forth,
And lead my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal catmp:
NORVAL, thou goeft with me But fay, young man,
\ here didft thou learn so to dilcourle of war,
And in such terms, as 1 o'erheard to day?
\\ar is no village fcicnce, nor it's phrale
A language taught among the shepherd (wains.

Torv,. Small is the Ikill my lord delights to praise

Il him lie tavours.-Hear tronl whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's bro.v, the miolt remote
And inaccellible hy fllepherds trod,
Ina deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv', ; a melancholy nian,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains.
Aulteie anu lonely, cruel to hi:nlelf,
Did they report him ; the cold earth his bed,.
\\ater his drink, hiia ood the Ihepherds alms.
I went to fee him, and nly heart was touclh'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he speak,
And, entring on dilcourle, fich stories told
As iitc nie ott rcvilit his tlad cell,
For he had been a toldicr in his youth;
And totliht in i'a;iinus battles, when the peerc
Ot Europe, hy the bo;d GOD REDO led,
Againit th' ulurping Intidel dilplay'd
'Ilhe crols of'Chrift, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with nly aiJiiration, and the fire

D j H.is

His speech itruck from me, the old man wou'd (hake
His years away, and at his young encounters:
Then having (hew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the finooth green turf
He cut the figures of the nlarfhall'd hotis;
Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the uli
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crefent, and the phal.anx firm.
For all that Saracen, or Chritlian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

Lord Ran. Why did this soldier in a defart hide
Those qualities, that shou'd have grac'd a camp?

Nor'v. That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man!

Returning homewards by lMellina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boill'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The stranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage, MIighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh ! my brother!

Lady Ran. His brother!
ANorzv. Yes; of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd torgivenefs;
\nd happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the surviver fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on fonie nameless ttream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At timnes, alas ! not in his perfe-A mind [
Holds dialogues with hia lov'd brother's ghost
Andoft each night forlikes his fullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady Ran. To what mylterious woes are mortals born'
In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons? did the parents live?

A'orv. No; they were dead: kind heav'n had clob'd

their eyes
Before their Ion had sied his brother's blood.

Lord Ran. Hard is his tate ; for he was not to blame!

There is a delliny in this strange world,
VM hich of: decrees an undelcrved dconm!

Let

Let fchoolmen tell us why.-From whence these founds ?

[Trumpets at a diaJance.]

Ent, an OFFICER.

Officer. My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RA N DO LP It.

Lord Ran. Mine ancient guet ! does he the warriors

lead ?

Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

Officer. No ; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword

His eldell hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord Ran. GLENALVON, go,

With hofpitaliry's most arong request
Entreat the chief. [Exit GLENALVON.]

Officer. My lord, requefis are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord Ran. May victory fit on the warrior's plume !

Bravest of men ! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures Ive,
By mountains inacceflible fecur'd:
Yet forenolt he into the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But Itill for love of glory, and of arms,
Prone to encounter peril,and to lift
Againfi each Ltrong antagonilt the spear.
I'll go and press the hero to my bread.

[Exit RANDOLPu.J

Malnent Lady RANDOLPH and NoRVAL.

Lady Ran. The Ibldier's loftincfs, the pride and pomp

Invelting awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

Nor'. Ah ! Ihould they not?

Bleli be the hour I left my lather's house!
I might have been a thepherd all my days,
And stole ohfcurely to a peasant's grave.
Now, it I live, with mighty chiefs I fland
And, itl tall, with noble duff I lye,

L:uty Ran. 'I here is a gen'rous Ipirit in thy bread,
That could have wvell ultain'd a prouder fortune.

Thiu

This way with me; under yon spreading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

Arerv. Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,

That I may hug it to my greatful heart,
And prove my taith. Command my sword, my life;
These are the sole poffeflions of poor Nor.VA/L.

Lady Ran. Know'lt thou these gems ?
NorvJ. Durst I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady Ran. Thy father's lay'tt thou ! ah ! they were

thy father's!

rorv. I law them once, and curiously enquir'd

Of both my parents whence such splendor came?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady Ran. Then learn of me thou are not No Rv&'s

ton.

Norv. Not NORVAL'S ton!
Lady Ran. Norof a Lhepherd sprung.
Aorcv Lady, who am I then?
Lady Ran. Noble thou art;
For noble was thy fire !

Norv. I will believe-
! tell me farther ! Say, who was my father ?
Lady Ran. DOUGLAS!
Nor-'. Lord Do UG Ls, whom today I saw ?
Lady Ran. His younger brother.
Norv. And in yonder camp ?
Lady Ran. Alas!
Nlorv. You make me tremble-Sighs and tears!
Lives my hrave father?

Lady Ran. Ah ! too brave indeed !
He !cll in b.ittle ele thylelf was horn.

No'v. Ah me unhlIppy I ere I law the light ?

But tloes my mnorlter lie ? I may conclude,
Fro,m .ny own late her portion has heen sorrow.

Lauy Ran. Site lives; but walles her life in conflant

woe,
Weeping her hflband slain, her infant loft.

Nor-'. You that are Ikill'd lo well in the fad llory

Ot my uriil: py parents, and with tears
Bewail their dcitiny, now have cosnleallion

t 'Upon

Upou the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
) ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Opprlt by a hale world, perhaps Ihe bends
Beneath thei weight of other ills than grief;
And delholate, impl.res of heav'n, the aid
Her Ion flould give. It is, it must be rfo
Your countenance confesses that (he's wretched.
O! tell Ime her condition! Can the sword-
Who shall refilt me in a parent's cause ?
Lady Ran. Thy virtue ends her woe.-My son, my

son !
amn thy mother, and the wife of DoUGLAS !

[ Falls upn his netk.

Vorv. 0 heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my fate!

Art thou my mother! Ever let me kneel!

Lady Ran. ImageofDouoLAS ! Fruit of fatal love!

All that I owe thy fire I pay to thec.

.\orv. Respect and admiration still poflefs me,

Checking the love and fondness of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my fire surpass the reft of men,
As thou excellef all of womankind ?

Lady Ran. Arise, my son ! In me thou dost behold
The poor remains of beauty once adinir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my luimmer halle away.
Yet in my prime I equal'd not thy tather:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet lonietiines
Liker the dove's, and as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with Ioftnels, or with spirit aw'd.

Norv. How did he fall? Sure'twas a bloody field

When Dou GLA s died. 0 I have much toalk!
Lady Ran. Hereafter thou (halt hear the lengthen'd

tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: Thou are the rightful heir
Of yonder caltle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RAN DOLPnH, as my husband, holds.
But thou (halt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still: Betore the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord Do u L AS to protect his blood.

A'or,,. The blood ot DoUGLAS will protect itself

Lady

Lady Ran. But we (hall need both friends and favour,

boy.

To wrest thy land and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinfian. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

A'orv. To be the son of DOUCLA s is to lme

Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady Ran. Thou dolt not know what perils andin-

jullice

Await the poor man's valour. O ! my son !
The noblest blood in all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacquay but pale poverty.
Too long halt thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS!
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglori6us chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sport;
Whillt thy indignant spirit fwrll'd in vain!
Such contumely thou no more (halt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prudence direas
That we (hould part before yon chiefs returns,
Retire, and from thy rultick follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, diaated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of plivate conlerence. It's purport Hmark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
L.eave me, my son ! and frame thy manners till
To NORVAL'S, 1ot to noble DOUGLAS' slate.

Vory. I will remember. Where is NORVAL now?
'Ihat goodi old man.

Iatil Ran. At h.nd conceal'd he lies,

An ufl'ul witness. But beware, my son,
Ot yonl G;LEN A I.Vo .; in his guilty breatl
Rcefies a villain's Ihrewdnels, ever prone
To t:al'e conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.

Norv. Has he indeed ? 'hen let yon falC GLE-

N ALVO N
Beware of me. [Exit DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDO LPri.

Ltdy

Lady Ran. There burst the fmnother'd flame!
O! thou all righteous and eternal King!
Who father of the tatherlels art call'd,
Prote& mly son !- Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breads of his forefathers burn'd:
Sr-himn on high like them, that he may fline
The liar and glory of his native land!
Then let the minitier of death descend,
And hear iny willing Ipirit to it's place.
Yc-nder they come. How do bad women find
Lncha:nging afpeas to conceal their guilt ?

'h:n I by realon, and by jullice urg'd,
Fu'l hardly can di:'enible with these men
In .ature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH andGLEN ALVO N.

Lord Ran. Yon gallant chief,

Ot':rms enalniour'd, all repote disclaims.

Lady Ran Be not, lyLold, by his example fway'd:

Arrange the l!inlselsot to. morrow now,
And wlhen you enter, speak of war no more.

IExit Lady RANDOLPH.

Manent Lord RANDOLPH andGrt.ENALvoN.
Lord Ran. 'Tis Ib by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her

eve,

And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

Gl/n. He parted from her now: Behind 'he mount,
AniongRt the trees, I law him glide along.

I.ord Ran. For fad Icqneller'd virtue lie's renow,'d I
Gln. Iloft true, my Lord.
Lord Ran. Yet thisdiffinguilh'd damt.e

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to ineet her at the midnight hour.
'lhis allignation, (/le.tus a letter.) the affaflin freed,
IHer manitell atfection for the youth,
M.li!,ht bl ed uflpicion in a hulband's brain,
\VWlole gentle conlbrt all for love had wedded:
:Mluch more in mine. MlATt Lrn. never luv'd me.
Let no mlan, anter me,a woman wed,
\v hose heart lie knows he has not; tho' file brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry:
For let her seem, like the night' I(hadowy queen,

Cold

Cold and contemplative ;-He cannot trust her:
She may, Ihe will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
'The wort offorrow and the wori of Ihames!

Glen. Yield not, myLord, to such afflicting thoughts;

But let the spirit of an hulband sleep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet muff to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits imy trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his mailer.
In the close thicket take your secret ifand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord Ran. Thou doff counsel well.
G!s". Permit me now to make one flight efray.

Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won.
The first and fairest, in a young man's eye,
Is woman's captive heart. Successful love,
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind i
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord Ran. And what avails this maxim?
Glen. Much, my Lord!

Withdraw a little: I'll accoff young NORV AL,
And with ironical, derisive counlel,
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAI., by thy favour rais'd.
Brave as he is, he'll fbrink altonifl'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon ime as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord Ran. 'Tis (frewdly thought.
Glen. When we grow loud, draw near. But let my

Lord
His cooling wrath restrain. [Exit RANDOLPH.

lMainet GLENALVON.

Glen. 'Tis ftrarge, by heav'n!

That Ihe fIouid run full tilt her fond career,
To one so litile known. She too that Ieem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice embofs'd,
,bLticns its courcf. Even I did think her chaste,

Whore

W.1'ole chari'v exc.eils no;. Precious sex!
\V. hule !deJ s li.lci ous p ils GI. N A I.V N's thougtlIs!

No R v . L appears.

i, pr-rt I 1 v; h:':; in l ponper mood
Ti,,c!,e the thuinder i at hin it roar'd.
11.; N oi v A.. 1 :eii tic tro)p.r ?

\Vo,-'. ' lhe fcrt'ingfin,

\\ith cilow raJiance liiihtn'd all the vale,
Andl s the w.irriors in v ',v. lc l polisi'd helm,
'.., iiie;, or lpc.ar, gl Inc'l 1 ack his gilded beams.
'1 he hili tihy cliiiib'il and halting at it's top,
Oi .ni i 'an imort;al li..?, to'.v'ring, they leein'J,
\: !:o!t nl clic, cla i ii burning arms.

Glen. 'I l.l talk': it c, :i; no leader of our hoR,

In lounls nioreloltv, ipeaks ot( glorious war.

.'or .' I 1 Ih.all ,'er acquire a lead r's name,

Mly peech b.

ill be le's ardent..Novelty

Now prompts nmy to:ngue. rid youtiritul admiration
Vents it!lt rerlv ; firce no part is mine
0( pril e. pert.liini to the great in armns.
CGle. Y;,) wrong yourlelf, brave fir; your martial

(!eeus
Hive rank'd you with the great: but mnrk loe, Non-

V L ;

I.ir.! R.I N uoitl. I's tavour now exilt r! our '.outh
.A'ove his veterans o' lamous servi.ce.
I n' .. ,who) know thele soldiers, coinircl you.
(;:ve thliie all honour; ClCem not to com:n:ind ;
L.:e they will Icarcely brook your l.ate Iprung pnw?r,
\V'.lich nor alliance props, nor hiirth a :orns.

XorvJ. Sir, I have been accullom'd tll mny dl V

To hear and Ipeak the plain and fiunple iruri!' .
Ani tho' I have been told, that there i r' ,,i.n
\VWh boirn row iefdfliip's tonguc to I'f .1'. il. i;

.i

Yet in tu.hl mingua-: I am little fkdl'.i.
'lierero:c I thank (li.r\'Al voN tor hi-, c v:r.'
.A\lth) it 1'oiiiI.lcl hilldv. Whly remind
\le ot nmy birthl ohbcule I

\'lnv slur nv po.' c:

'With fIuch contempt uotis terms ?
(,/A I did not mean
1 ') all ynur pride, w liich now I fee i:. 't.

sr- 'Mlcprit.l!

v

Glen. Suppress it as you wilh to prosper.

Your pride's excelfve. Yet for RANDOLPHi's fake
I will not leave you to it's rash diretion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a Lhepherd's scorn!

Nor,. A lhepherd's scorn!
Glen. Yes; ifyou presume

To bend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you ?

N'or. If this were told !- Afde.
Hall thou no fears for thy presumptuous felfl

Glen. Ha ! Dost thou threaten me?
Ner-',. Didft thou not hear?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee-

,orv. Whom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
,\'orv. Sol am ---
And who is NORVAL in GLENAr.voN's eyes?

Glen. A pealant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
:t bellt no more, even it' he speak-s the truth.

rot,-v. False as thou art, doll thou fufpet my truth'
Glen. Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lye; and talle as hell
Is the vain-glorious talc thou told'lt to R \ x DO.PH.

N.or,'. If I were clhain'd, unarml'd, and bedrid old,

Perhaps I should revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. Thc humble NoRVAL
Is of a race, who strive not but w;th d.eds.
Did I not fc:ir to free.ze thy Ihallow valour,
And make thee link too soon beneath nmv fvcrd,
I'd tell thee whnt thou art. I know t'lee w ell.

Glen. Dolt thou not know GI.LNAI.VON, born to

conll:nnd

i en thoullnd laveslike thee?

Norp. Villain, no more:

I)raw and defend thylife. I did design
To have dety'd thee in another cause:
But heaven accelerates it's vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RA DOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RA NDOLP H.

Lord

Lord Rk.. Hold, I command you both. The nin that
.iJkecs ime his toe. lftirs

3'c . Annoher vw)ice than rhine
T1ti threat had vainly foundled. noble IRANDOLPH.

G(ln Hear him, my lord ; he'swotdrous condelcend-
iMik the humiility ot fll-pSerd NORVAL! [ing
Vors-. Now you may IcottinSalcty. [Sheaths hisJ Bijw .)
Litr RKa. Speak not thus,

TI.Iunt:ig each other; hut untfld to me
'i ,e caulc ot q.iarrel, then ljuugge betwixt you.

N\orv. Nay, my good lord, tho' I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor dermad your judgment.
Iblufh to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubje.t's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd rejel.
Within ny bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, (ole judge and umpire ofitfelf.
li my free speech offend you, noble RAN DOLP H,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dilhonour'd.

Lord Ran. Thus far I'll meditate with impartial voice:

The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Sulpend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen I agree to this.
Norv. And 1.

Enter SER VANT.

Serv. The banquet waits.
Lord Ran. We come. [Exit RANDOL1H.
Glen. No RV L,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the holpitality of RA N D u I. :, t.
Nor frowninganger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall slain my countenance. Smooth thou thy brow;
Norlet our lrite dilturb the gentle dame.

NorJ. 'Think, not (b lightly, Sir, or ily refcnt:nent;
When we contend again our irife is mortal.

'. ', ACT.

# ACT V.

## SCENE I. The Wood.

A C V.
S C E N I' I. T.'c 1:ico,

Et:r.r DL)LuC.I.AS,

HIS is the p'ace the ccitc: ol the grove
Here tfands the oak, the monarch of the wooc

How futeet aildl f'blii:n i'h thi- niidl-nicht Icenc !
The silver eoon, unclouided holYs lher wav
Thro' C1 . ·

..}-.: i tcoild count each little It.r

'The s-1:.i.' ; . ,'' I in d f(Iarct-;y i irs the leaves
'1 I.e ':ser .:f,:";.' u'er it, pebbled b ed,,

.*, * li'hencc wi ;ith a Ililly found.
1:. iurlch r' c

a .t ' i- at Iach an hour.

I. .'.<. ill c;an he i;: aught believ'd,
bOtcecnding s'pirits have convers'tl with man,
'\ ii to!d tlhe lecrers of tle world unknown.

E.tier Old N o p.v A .
(1d .\Vc ' 'l'is he. But wlhat il he flould chide im

hei:ce ?
liisju!t reproach I fear. [DOUrI..S r.s turl:s anlJjisl:i

Forgive, forgive,

Can'll Ihou forgive the :an, the selfish nan.
Who bred Sir Mar.CCL.;'S heir a Ihepherd's son.

Doug. Kneel nor to n:e: thou art my father still:

Thy v.-isl'd for prcfence now compleats my joy..
W\\clcon:e to me, niy fortunes thou fnalt (hare,
And ever honour'd ; ith thy DoUGcLAS live.

Old N'ot---. And (lo'fl thou call ine father ? O uny son

I thin:k that I cou!tk die to make almends
For the greaCt wion :I did thlee. ' I'.vas my crimne
W\hiIth in the ild - '.inls Iv long conceal'd
'Ihe Il hItl;osi of ilv volith.

DtGII. Not v. ,Ic' Ichc fruitr,

'I lihat in the xv ild. err.c: the l)'ol'ril llow'd.
Aniogfl tlhe f:ephllt il the hiunle cot,
I Ivrn'i! I;ln:e Il.tns, which I'll not torget
\\ le n I inh:lbit vondcr loftv towers.
1. v ho ans once a Iwain,,\ril ever prove
'1'li poor man's friend; and, whtln my vafialls how.
I\or.vAL flil! finooth the crtfltc pride ot Doucs .AS

v'c. v Let nc but live to f-e thine exalation !

Yet cricvous are ivy fears. O leam e this place,
And thole unfriendlv towerm.

no.,,.

P;:<g. Why . rulJ, I k.-tvc theal C
.' ,r. .Lord RA- U L P 1[ aUlll i; .
k ,:.:, I 1. ' our

life.

n;.i. HIow kno..'fi' thou that '
.'7Srv I will intorl you jo)w.

\' hlen evenirlg ca i:-, I eIit tihe lI:.rct pl.i.
:ppointed tfr nre 1, your l:othrtr c cac,
XAn fonrllv trod in cac'i a-c:ll' .: d part
'I'hat t c

the c.aile lead-'. \V h:!' t'a i I r.ang'l,

I was alar 'd vith iir:' p'-e p . lo i1d.'
o(tearneft voicer. On t,c vrn ,,:: camne:
t:'neen I lurk',!, and o'.,'eri -. i1' !i' nlc n;r.i e
'::ch other as thev tal'i, .*r. .! '. D, no t his,.
\nd that G Lt.:. A.v ,'::: l ill of you tlhey (poke,
And of the lady : threating wa; tieir Ipeech,
'ho' but imperfetlv Eliy ear coul! hear it.
T f.'as ltrange, they laid, a w.o'lle i t'l dii co', 'i\ .
.An.l ever and anon t',ev vow',l revelngc.

D.rag. RevenCge ! forl w.l it
A'orv. For being what you are;

Sir MA Lco i.Ml' heir: how elle have you offended
W\\hen they were gone, I lide me to my cottage,
.\ad thee atL muling how I hellt might fnd
'icans to inform you of their wicked put pose,
'ut I 'could think of none : at llt perplex'd
iilfifed forth, incompalilliig the tower
V. ith

, anv a weary Itep and wiflfful look.

NAw providence hath brought you to my fight,
i. t not your too courageous Ipirit scorn
'lhe caution which I give.

Do:ug. I scorn it not.

IlMy mother warn'd eic ofGfCENALvoI's hafenefs:
hut I will not lulpel the noble R. N DOL 'll.
1:1 our encounter with th, vile airririns,
1 marked his brave demeanour: him 1'1t trust

A'ofsr I fear you v.illtoo far.
DI)g. Here inl this place

I w;ui! mly nmother's cooming: flie fhi!l know
\Vl.tt thou haft tod : hr counsel I \ill 'iol' v'
And c.autious ever are a ilorher'C coun lrs.
Yo'u ,,i.:u depart; o ur plefence im.ta picver

'.:r' i,,l;e:,',:· i.

13

.Ncrv. My blefling reft upon thee !

O my heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee fill;
Turning niilchance, if aught hangs o're thy head,
All upon mine ! [Exit Old NORVAL

Doug. He loves me like a parent;

And null not, thall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his Ibn has found a nobler tather.
Eventful day ; how haft thou chang'd my fiate '
Once on the cold, and v inter fladed tide
Ot a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child o4 another foil:
Trsnfplanted now to tih gay lunny val,
Like the green thorn ot lMay my fortune liower:
Ye glorious stars! high ieav n's refp!endent holt'
To whom I oft have of my lot cominlain'd,
Hear and record my loul's unalter'd wifl!
Dead or alive,let nme but be renown'd'
May hcav'n inspire foine fierce gigantic Dane,
Tlo give a bold defiance to our holt
Beolre he speak; it out Iwvill accept;
Like Dou G LA conquer, or like Dot ;r. A; d;e

Enter Lady R ND OLPH.

L.ady Ran. NMv Ion' I heard a voice--
Doug. --That voice was Mine.
Ladv Rc:. Didti thou conplainalor:d to naiure'. ear

That thus in dusky fliades, at niid-night hours.
By Itealth the mother and the fun Ihould rnet ?

Emlbratir.g hir,

Dc,ig. No; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My thoughts and x ords are all of hope and joy.

Laoiy Ran Sad tear and melancholy llill divide

The ellpile oi niy breall with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advile.

Doug. Fillt, let me tell
What miay the tenor of your counftl change.

Lady Ran. My leal t for:cLuo.cs loime evil
Doug. 'Tis not good --

Ateve, ulfecn by RA.NDOLi;'t ann! CGL.t A LVO0,
The gooi old No uKVAL in :h' grov u*,' ti-h :l d
'I lcir conscrlation: olt they Inelti ,:'.: ' , c
With dreadful thicatningsi ) ou they Iun..ctiucs nam'd.

'"1 was

Trwas strange, they said, a wonderful discovery;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge

Lady Ran. Defend us, gracious God ! we are betray'd
They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir MA LCO LM'S heir is come to ciaiam his own;
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
\ darker and more silent hour to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee !
Fly to the camp, my son!

Doug. And leave you here ?
No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the ancient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
Itin the breasts of men one spark remains
Offacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ask but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.
Lady Ran. 0 nature, nature! what can check thy

torce ?

Thou genuine offspring of the daring DouG.As !
But rulh not on detltrucion: lave thy self,
And I am iafe. To me they mean no hatin.
'hy tlay but rilks thy precious lite in vain.
That winding path conducts thee ;o the river.
Crols where, thou feetl a broia: :. !,eaten way,
Which runnirg ealtwara lkcad thee to the camp.
Initant demand adnittan.e to L.oi; DOUGLAS.
Shew hiim thefi jewels, .hicil his brother wore.
'I hy look, thy voice, will nmake limn leel the truth,
Vv hich I by certain proof will ,oon conirii.

Dm.g I t eld me and obey: lur yIt i my he.rt

Bleeds at this parting. Something 1Idlts nie tity
And guard a mother's lile. Uft have I read
Ot v on.'rotis deeds hy one holu arm atcliiev'd.
Our ocd aire two; ,io imoe: let lie go tolth,
And lee if any Ihield can guird G( L. 'i I VO N.

Lady Rn. 1I thou rrgali'llt thy uiorhl.i or rever'ft

Thy tathcr'i nelni'ry, think ol this no n1olc.
One thin;, I hlave to lay belbre vc puat: Long

Long vwert thou loft; and thou art found, nty child,
In a mooll ftarlul tfalbn. War and battle
I have great caule to dread. Too well I fee
\Which way the current of thy temper sets:
'o day I've found thee. Oh ! my long la.i hope!
It' tho. to gidly valour giv'llt the rein,
To imorrowv 1 may lole my son for ever
The love of thee, )beore thou faw'ft the light,
Suiftain'd lmy life vwhen thv brave father fcll.
t'thou shalt fall, I have n ir love nor hope
In this wafie world t my son, remember me !

Doug \Vhat lhall 1 fay ? how can 1 give you colforl

The God of battles of my lite dilpofe
As may be best for ycu ! for whose dear fake
1 will not bear niyfelt'as I refolv'd.
Hut yet conrrier, as no vulgar name
That which 1b1oafL Ibounds a mongft martial men
1How will inclorious caution suit my clainl ?
'IThe poll o'f 'te unfiirking I maintain.
Mly country's foes mufl wiitnels who I am.
()n the invaders headt I'll prove n)y birth,
' ill si icnds and foes confels the genuine itrain.
lt'in this tfrite I fall, blame not your son,
W\ho it' he lives not honour'd, niuft not live.

Lady .ar.I. 1 will not utter what my bofonl feels.

' I'oo well 1 love that valour which I warn.
I'arcwcl, mv son ! mv counlels are but v.ain. [Embracing
And as high heaven hath willd it all mul be. [Jeparates
Lady Ran. Gaae not on me, thou wilt iillake the pathi
I'll point it out again.

[ Jufi as they are feerating, enter from the wold
Lord RKAIrOI.rH and GL. AI.VO\N.]

Lord Ran. Not in her presence.
Novw--

GlCn. I'm prepar'd.
Lord Ran. No: I commnnd tliec flay.

I go alone: it never lnall be said
That I took odt: to comibat mortal man.
The noblcll vengeance is the tnlf conplealr.

[Exit Lord KA ?; DOI. P i]
[G i. E. A I . V N nalrcsfomefJe-l. to :hrjamr]JIe of lh

/lage, lifens andfpeaks ]

G'11-

.:rn Dcmlons of death come fettle on my sword,
,d to a double slaughter guide it home !
1 lhe lover and the hufoand both must die.

[Lord RAN DOL PH behind the iene.]

.ord Ran. Draw, Villain ! draw.
Do:ig. Afifail me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
' : a: thou lovit thy felt. [Cla/bing off wordJ.]

[G L NALVON running out.]

Cow: is the time.
. :,r ..ady R A DO. P H at the ofpof/ie fide of the /lag1 ,

fmrnt and breathlfs.

s.ady Ran. Lord RANDOLPH hear me, all liall be
But Ipare! 0 spare my son! [thine own:

Enter DOUGLAS zcitb a fticd in each band

Mly mother's voice!
1 c-.n proteCt thee tlill.

l..Ily Ran. He lives, he lives:

I'or tl.is, lor this to heaven eternal praise!
;,:!( lure 1 saw thee fall.

Dj:,g. It was GLENALVON.
[u:l a; my arnm had mialter'd RAN DOLPH'S sword,
'1 le villain came behind ne; but I flew him.

Lady Ran. Behind thee! Ah; thou'rt wounded! 0

imy child,
Ilow pale thou look'l ! and fliall 1 lose thee now?

Ot:!g. Do not despair: I feel a little tfintnefs;
I holpe it will not lalt. [Lien's upon lisJfword]

Lady Ran. There is no hope !

And we nmuil part! the ha:nd ol death is on thee!
O my beloved child! O0 DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS !

[DoU; CLAS g otring moreand mor faint.]

Dung Too ioon \x e part: I have not long been

O dillinv ! hai dy thout dtcl'il: wh ne: [DOU ;LAS.
Liou'du and hid, a llr;tnger to imytelt,
In low and poor obicunviv 1 'iv'l.

Lady Rin HFas heas;ii prelciv'd thee for an end like

thi ?

Doug. 0 had I fallen as iny hrave father's fell,

Turning with fatal arm the tide ol battle!
I.ike them 1 Ihould have Ifil'Jl and welcoml'd death.
Ilut thus to perifi by a villain', hdnd !
Cut off'roln nature's and from glory's course,
V'licli never mortal was so fond to run. l.ady

Lady Ran. Hear,jufice! hear ! are these the fruitsof

virtue? Dou LAs a/Ilj

Dcug. Unknown I die: no tongue (hall speak of

Some n ble Ipirirs, judg;ng by themselves, [inc.
May yet conjecture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who Ihall comfort thee?

Lady Ran Despair! delpair!
Doug. 0 had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live

A little while ! my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace I my mother.- [Dini.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANN A.
Lord Ran. Thy words, the words of truth, have.

pierc'd my heart,

I am the lain of knighthood and of armr.
Oh! if my brave deliverer survives.
The traitor's sword

Anna. Alas ! look there, my lord,
Lord Ran. The mother and her son! How curftR

Was I the cause ? No: I was not thecaufe. [am!
Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To fiantic jealouly.

Anna. My lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fuppreft
A while her powers.

Lord Ran. But my deliverer's dead !

The world did once etleem Lord RANDOLPH well,
Sincere of heart, for Ipotlefs honour fain'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now palt the noon of lite, shame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RANDOLPiH balely flab'd Sir MALCOL.. 's heir.

[Lady RANDOLIH recovering

Ladv Ran Where am I now ? still in this wretched

Griet cannot break a heart so hard as mine. [world!
My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's ftrengtb,
With hope's alliltance, bore the burnt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the object now,
On which omnipotence displays itfelt,
Making a fpcncler, a tale of me,
To awe it's valsTl, man. Lord

Lord Ran. 0 milery!
Amidst thy raging grief I mult proclaim
My innocence.

Lady Ran. Thyinnocence!
Lord Ran. My guilt
Is innocence, compared with what thou think'ft it

Lady Ran. Of thee I think not: what have I to do

With thee, or any thing ? My son ! my Ton !
My beautiful! imy brave! how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
W'ho might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my husband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead! A little while
Was 1 a wife ! a mother not so long I
What am I now ?- 1 know.- But I shall be
That only whilst I please; for such a son
And such a huiband make a woman bold. [I\uns out.

Lord Ran. Follow her, A N N A : I myfelfwould follow,
But in this rage the muff abhor my pretence. lEx. AN N A.

Enter Old NORVAL.

Nora. I heard the voice of woe; heaven guard my
Lord Ran. Already is the idle gaping croud, [child !

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDOLP H.
Begone.

Aror.u. I fear thee not. I will not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To crush down to the ground this lovely plant.
0 noblelt youth that ever yet was born I
Sweetest and heft, gentlet and biaveft spirit,
That ever blest the world I Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble Ipirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it I
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret,
WVhich timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's Inare. Oh! I am punilh'd now!
These are the hairs that Ihould have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of Do UG .As.

[tears his hair, and throws himself upon the

ground. Lord

Lord Ran. I know thee now: thy boldners I forgive .

My crell is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of rell, if grief will let thee ref. '
] wiil reward, altho' I cannot punih.
Curtl, curlt GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well, r?,
Tho' fliin and haffed by the hand he hated. i
Foaming with rage and fury to the lad,
Cuifinl; !:is conqueror, the felon dy'd,

Enter An N A.

Asra . My Lord, my Lord! '
Lore Ran Speak: I can hear of horror. )
Anna Horror indeed! i
Lord Ran. MATILDA? '
Anna. Is no more:

She ran. flhe flew like light'ning up the hill, -:
Nor halrcd till the precipice she gain'd,
Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in r:fted rocks: thither (hecame,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

Lord Ran. 'Twas l! alas! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury; drove her down
The preci ice of death! Wretch that I am!

Anna. i had you seen her lad despairing look !

Upon the brink The Rood, and caRl her eyes
Down on the deep: then lifting up her head '
And her white hand to heaven, I'eeming to fay,
Why an I forc'd to this ? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord Ran. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul,
Pence in this world I lever can enjoy.
Thee wounds tlh gratitude ot RANDOo.PH gave ,.,
They speak aloud, anil with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom. I'an relolv'd. I'll go -
Straight to the hattle, where the man that makes '
Me turn aside lmult threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy millrelf, take this ring, *
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With cost and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never Ihall return.. \

F I V I S.
