AtLWP 1OID 0U tsLAm J'. cen&51

W.&4

-1~n~
d~. 778. hrtr~ni

OlzAck-1rDOP
~/M~~T,~4',t~iJ/e' ó/u,,,I~~

0$ ~~./dO /l7x 5'& //Osl sl Iyn. i'uI

B'E LL'S E D I I O N.
DO U G LAS:

A TRAGE-DY.
As written by, Mr. F1 UME.

BD9TINGUISHING ALZO THt
VARIATIONS OF THE THEATRE,

Al PERFORMED AT THE
'aeat're-oRpal {n DurptLitae.

Regulated from the Prompt;Buok,
By PERMISSION of the MANAGERS,

By Mr. HOPK INS, Prompter.
zun segoafun vates, fed prifcius ccnfcius £;

LONDON
Printed for JOHn BeLL, near Exeter-Excbange, in the Stranc.

MIICCLXX¥1Y7I

# PROLOGUE.

P R O L O G U E
IN antient times, when britain's trade was arns,

And the lov'd mujic of heryouth, alarms,

Agod-like race fJflain'dfair England's fame:
Who has not heard of gallant Piercy's name ?
AY, and of Douglas? Such illurious foes
In rival Rome and Carthage never rose !
From age to age bright hone the Britijh fire,
And every hero wvas a hero'sJire.
When powerful Fate decreed one warrior's doom,
Up prung the Phanixfrom his parent's tomb.
But whi/lt these generous rivals fought and fell,
'e}fe generous rivals lov'd each other wtll:
Though many a bloodyfield rwas loft and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all wai done.
Wlhen Piercy wrong'd, def'd his prince or peers,
Fast came the Douglas, with his Scotti/hjpears;
And, when proud Douglas made his King hisfoSe
For Douglas, Piercy bent his Englibh bow,
Expell'd their native homes by advrfe fate,
hey knock'd alternate at each other's gate:
Then blaz'd the caJfle, at the midnight hour,
For him whose arms badjhook itsJirmeft towir.
This night a Douglasyourproteition claims-;
A wife! a mother! pity'sfoftel names:
The fiory of her woes indulgent hear,
And grantyour suppliant allJhe begs, a tear.
In confidenee, Jhe begs; and hopes tofind
kach Englilh brra/ like noble Piercy's, kind.

A DRA*

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

[ 4 ]
DRA MATIS P E R S O.N e,

. E N.

.Drury-Lane. Coveat.-Garden,

Lord Randolph, Mr. jefferson. Mr. Wroughton,
Glenalvon, - Mr. Palmer. Mr. Aickin.
Norval, Douglas, Mr. Brereton. Mr. Lewis,
Stranger, -- Mr. Packer. Mr. Clarke,
Servants, &; "

W M E N.

7sitilda, Lady

Randolph, . [rs,. Barry. Mrs. Barry.
Aina, - Mrs. Rcddifh. Mrs. Moreton.

DOUGLAS.

DOUGLAS.
**" T' liats difiinjgped by inaerted comras, £ tbwu,' are ctrittrd in

the repreftrtation.
SCENE, the Court of a Cafile, firrounrcd t'with Wodi.

Enter LadyrRANDOLPH.

LADY RANDOLPHI.

y E woods and wilds, whose melancholy groom
Y Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my burfling heart,
Farewel a while: I will not leave you long;
For in your fliades I deem some fpirir dwells,
Who from a chiding stream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers ro Matilda's moan.
Oh, Douglas ! Douglas ! if departed ghosts
Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the citcle of that wood thou art,
And with the pallion of immortals hear'st
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband (lain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn;
Who perifli'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
Oh, disregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my Douglas, in thy bloody grave.

A3 * S

But Randolph comes, whom faie has made my Lord,
To chide my anguilb, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord Randolph.

Lord R. Again there weeds of woe ! Say, dost thou

To feed a passion which consumes thy life ? [wcll
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Beflow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady R. Silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn:

Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives. [guifli

Lord R. Time, that wears out the trace of deepest an.

Has pat o'er thee in vain. ' Would thou iver't'not
' Compos'd of grief and tenderpefs alone !'
Sure thou art not the.daughter of.Sir Malcolm.:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That Douglas? son in the fame field was slain.
La3y R. Oh ! rake not up the alies of my fathers:
Implacable resentment was tie crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.
Contending with the Douglas, gallant lives
Of either houfe.were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at lafti to leave theii aiicihet feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left.i 'Had they not'been'fo Itern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord R. Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.

I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breasts of fancy's children burns.
Decent affecti6o, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I Wilh'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes behold
The Itorm of war'that gathers o'er this land:
If I ihould periih by the Daniifh sword,
Matilda would not filed one tear the more.

Lady R. Thou doll not think so: woeful as I am,

I love thy merit; and esteem thy virtues.
But whither go'it thou now ?

Lord R. Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on tip-toe flands
Of expectation,'aind impatient asks

Bacd

Each who arrives, if he is come to tell.
The Danes are landed.

Lady R. Oh, may adverfe.winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland drive their fleet i
And every soldier of both hosts return,
In pleace'and safety to his pleasant home!

Lord R. Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's wifil

Right from their native. land, thefiormy north,
May the wind blow, tillevery keel is six'd
Immoveable in Caledonia's firand !
Then shall our.foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal shore

' Lady R. War I detest: but war with foreign foes,

' Whose manners, language, and whose looks ai e frange,

Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage,
'A river here, there an ideal line
B y fancy'drawn, divides the sifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for theirvalour famous through the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they must have war, wage diflant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflit.
Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire,
The battle'is theirpaftime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as tofummer sport:
When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.
' Lord R. I'll hear no more: this melody would make '
A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
Yea, like a monk, sing reft and peace in heav'n.
To fouls of warriors in his battles slain.'

Lady,,farewel: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light. [Exit.

Enter Anna.

Anna. Forgive the rashness of your Anna's love:

Urg'd by affection, I have thus prefum'd
To interrupt your solitary thoughts;

And'

And warn you of the hours that you neglett,
And lose in sadness.

La'y R. So to lose my hours

Is all the use I wish to make of time.

Anna. To blame thee, lady, suits not with my state:

But sure I am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did fifler thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady R. Oh!
Anna. Have I difrefs'd you with officious lovey

And ill-tin'd mention of yourbrother's fate ?
Forgive me, lady: humble though I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady R. What power directed thy unconscious tongue
To speak as thou haft done? to name-

Anna. I know not.:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more; but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady R. No, thou lhalt not be silent;

I'll trust thy faithful love, and thou shalt be
Hencefot th th' inftru&ed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never-ebbing time ?
Compel theearth and ocean to give up'
Their dead alive ?

Anna. What means my noble miffrefs?
LadyR. Didft thou not ask what had my sorrows been,-

If I in early youth had loft a husband ?-
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth;
And in rome cavern of the ocean lies
My child and his.-

Anna. Oh ! lady, most rever'd!

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

LaldyR. Alas! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. , Ruling fate decreed .
That my brave brother should in battle save

n»

The life of Douglas'.fon, ourhoufe's foe:
The youthful warnors vow'd eternal friendlhip.
To fee the vaunted sifter of his friend,
Impatienr, Douglas to Balarmo came,
Under aborrow'd namne.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refuse the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
.Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd Lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did Malcplm go;
Scarce were they gone, when my fern fire was told
That the faife firanger was lord Douglas' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his iword
And queftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took
An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of Douglas' name. Sincerity!
Thou first of virtues,,let no mortal leave
Thy onward path! although the earth should gape,
And from the gulf of hll deftrution cry
To take dissimulation's winding way.

Anna. Alas! htiw few of woman's fearful kind

Durst own' a'tru'tio'hardy !

Lay, R. .The'fixf truith

Is easieR to avow. This norallearn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.---
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That Douglas and nlybrother both were fain.
My lord ! my lif! i my huibarid !-mighty Heaven-l
What' had I done to, merit such afflition ?

Anna. My dearest lady ! many a tale of tears
've listen'd to; biut never did I hear
A tale so fad as this

Laty R. In the first days

Of my difiracing grief, I found myself--.
As women wifl to be who love their lords.
But who durit tell my father ? The good-priel
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd Malcolm, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,

- - *r iIl

Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confidant I had,
Set out with me to reach her sifter's house:
But nurfei nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of, Anna, since that fatal hour.
' My murder'd child !--had thy fond mother sear'd
' The loss of thee, flie had loud fame defy'd,

Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,

' And wander'd with thee through the scorning world.'

Anna. Not seen, norheard of! then perhaps he lives.
Lady R. No. It was dark December; wind and rain

Had beat all night. Across the Carronlay
The deftin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
' Oh, hapless son ! of a most hapless fire !-
'But they are both.at reft; and I alone
' Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
' Like a guilt-troubled ghost, my painful rounds ;'
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a fdlitary sorrow.
Though dead to love; I was compell'd to wed
Randolph, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And Randolph now poffefles the domains,
That by Sir Malcolm's death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that liould to Douglas' son have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's.power.

Such were my soothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
' The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
' And when that son came, like a ray from heaven,

Which flines and disappears; alas ! my child!
' How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
l Of having thee, flie knew not how, reftor'd.
' Year after year liath worn her hope away;
' But left fill undiminifh'd her deflre.

' Anna. The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
' May smooth the length that's yet to come of yours.

Lady R. Not in this world: I have.confider'd well

Its'various evils, and on whom they fall.
Alas! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affection prove the spring of woe.'
Oh I had I died when my lov'd huiband fell !

Had

Had tome good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

Antn. That Power, whose ministers good angels are,

Hath shut the book, in mercy to mankind.
Bit we must leave this theme: Glenalvon comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly stalks his way.

Lady R. I will avoid him. An ungracious person

Is doubly irksome in an hourlike this.

Anna. Why speaks my lady thus of Randolph's heir.
Lady R. Because he's not the heir of Randolph's vir-

Subtle and shrew'd, he offers to mankind [tues.
'An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the taste
Of different men, its features. ' Self-denied,
' And mailer of his appetites he seems:
' But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,

W atches to seize unseen the wih'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill,

' As in Glenalvon's unrelenting mind;'
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And stands aloft in these unruly times.
Why 1 describe him thus I'll tell hereafter.
Stay, and detain him till I reach the cafele.

[Exit Lady Randolph.

Anna. Oh, happiness ! where art thou to be found ?

I fee thou dwellef not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur and in wealth array'd:
Nor dost thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Enter Glenalvon.

Glen. What dost thou muse on, meditating maid ?

Like some entranc'd and visionary seer,
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven.

Anna. Would that I were, e'en as thou fayfe, a seer,

To have my doubts by heavenly vifion'clear'd '

Glen. What dofl thou doubt of? What hail thou to do

With fubjeds intricate? Thy youth, thy beauty,
Cannot be queflioned: think of these good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

i B Anns.

Anna. Let women'view yon monument of woe,

Then boast of beauty: who so fair as he'?
But I must follow; this revolving day
Awakes the menidry of her antient woe's. [Exit Anna.

Glen. [Solus.] So !-Lady Randdlph fluns me; by and

I'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides. [by
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of the'e rich valleys, and a chief of pow'r.
The season is most apt; -.my founding'fteps
Will not be heard amidst the din of arms.
Randolph hasliv'd too long: his better fate
Had theifcendant once, and kept /ne down.;
When I had-feiz'd the dame,: by chance he came,
Refcu'd, and had the lady for his labour;
I 'fcap'd vnknown; a slender consolation'!
Heav'n is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest: Yet 1 am nqt safe:
By love or something like it, .sung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And the has threaten'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know;
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will notlive in fear . the man I dread
Is as a Dane toine': ay, and the mani
Who flands betwixtme and my chief desire.
No' bar but.he.; she has'no kinsman near;
No brother in his-fifter's quiarel bold',
And for the righteous cause,' a firanger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy Glenalvofh. [Exit.

ENi3 of the FIRST ACT.

ACT

# ACT II.

A C T II.

S CENt, a Court, &C.,
Enter }vrants *nd alStratnger at onedor, a Lady .Ran,

dolph.and Anna at.anotler.

LADY RANDOLPH.

HAT m.ansthis clamour? Stra)ger,,fpeak secure,;

W Haft thou been wirong'd? .Have-thefe rudte. ne,
To vex the weary traveller on his way? prefum'd

ft Servant. By .us no :fraqger ever susser'4 wrong '

This man with outcry wild.has call'd dil forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears,
Enter Lord Randolph and ayouing man, !with tbdir Jar.is

drawn and liooly.
Lady R. Not vain the iranger's fears ! IHow fars my

Lord?

Zord R. That it fares well, thanks to this.gallant youth.

Whose valour fav'd me from a wretched death !
As down the winding dale I.walk'd alone, .
At she crors.way four armed men attack'd me:
Rovers; I judge, from the licentious camp,
Who would have quickly laid Lord Randolph.low,. .
Had not this brave and generous stranger cone, '

.

,

Like my good angel, in thehour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes,his owsn.
They turn'd upon him; bit.his ative arm
Struck to the ground, frpno whence they rdie no more,
The fiercest two; the others fled amain,
And left him mafler of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady Randolph; upon beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy Lord.

Lady,R. My Lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.

My heart d'erfiows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown.
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave

B Fought

Fought on your fide, against such fearful odds,
.Have you not learn'd or him wihom nwe hould thank ?
Whom call the saviour of Lord Rardolph's life?

Lord R. I alk'd that quetlion, and he anfwel'd not:
But I must know wlio.my deliverer is. '{To the Sranger;

Strang. A low born man, of parentage obscure,

4Who nought can boast but his desire to be
Afoldier, and to gain. a name in arms.

Lord R. Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled

By the great King of Kings ! thou art ordain'd
¥And ftampt a hero by .the sovereign hand
eOs nature ! blush not, flower of modefly
*As well as valour, to declare thy birth.

. Sirang. My name is Norval: on the Grampion hills-
My father feeds iis focks; a frugal twain,
'Whose constant cares-were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
Tor I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field Come warlike lord;
'And heav'n soon grantedwhat my fire deny'd.
This moon which rose las night, round as my flield,
:'Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians fr6m the hills,
-Rufl'd like a torrent down upbn the vale,
' Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled

Forfafety, and for succour. I alone,
With.bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took; then hailed to my friends,
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led, -
`Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The flepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our.good king had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my Ifeps:-
.Yon trembling coward, who forsook his malter.

Journey-

Journeying with this intent, I past these towers,
And, heaven-direted, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

Lord R. He is as wife as brave. Was evc tale

With such a gallant modefRy rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer ! thou flialt enter noir
A nobler lilt, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for theprize of fame.
I will present thee to our Scottlfll king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour lov'd.
Ha ! my Matilda! wherefore flarts that tear ?

Lady R. I cannot fay: for various afletions,

And itrangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and I admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy fiffety.
Obscure and fr'endlefs, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gdin diftin&aior which his birth denied:
In this attemprunknown he might have perifld,.
And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He tfands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working hand of Heaven .,

Lord R. Pious and grateful ever are thy thoughts t

My deeds shall follow where thou point'it the way.
Next to myself, and equal to Glenalvon,
In honour and command ihall Norval be.,

Nor. I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,

In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my Lord,
There's something in'my breatl, which makes me bold'
To fay, that Norval ne'er will Ihame thy favour.

Lad, R. I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou shalt be

My knight; and ever, as thou dost to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of Randolph.
Lord R, Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid reply..

[To Norval.
B 2 We

We are thy debtors still; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I mutl proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my iraifi I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their ILord's delay.
Go with me, Norval, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languifi for the. fight, and beat the air,
With.brandilh'd swords.

Nor. Let us be gone, my Lord.
Lord R. [To Lady Randolph.] About the time that

the declining fun

Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expeit us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I refit my tent I pitch
To-morrow in'the field. Prepare the feast.
Free is his heart who forhis country fights:
HIe in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweetest then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exeunt Randolph and Norval.

Lady R. HIs parting words have truck a fatal trith.

Oh, Douglas! Douglas! tender was-the time
When we two paited, ne'er to meet again !
.How many year o6f arigtrfl and despair
Has heaven annex'd to those swift paineg hoi6t.
Of litve ahd fondtefs. ' Then my bofdm's flame
4-Of, aas blown back by the.rude breath of fear
' Return'd, aid: with redonbled ardour blaz'd.'

Anna. May gracious Heav'n pour the sweet balm of

Into the wounds that fefler in your breat [peace
For earthly consolation cannot cOre them.

Lady R. One only cure can Heav'n itself beftov;-

A grave-that bed in which the weary reft.
Wretch that I am! Alas! why am I so ?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blest the mother of yon gallant Norval!
She for a living hulband bore her pains,
And heard him bless herwhen a man was born:
She nurs'd her fimiling infant on her breast;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleating boy:

She,

She, with affeftion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness surpass his peers
Whilfl I to a dead hulband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child..
.,4na. Alas! alas-! why will you thus resume
Your grief afresh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won'you from your woe,
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye .
Has deign'd.on other objeEts to beflow..

Lady R. Delighted, fay'ft thou ? Oh ! even there mine-

Found fuel for my life-confuming sorrow ;. - [eye
I thought, that had thefon of Douglas liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant firanger,.
And pair'd with him in features and in.-flape.
In all endowments, as in years, I deem,
ly boy with blooming Norval might have number'd,.
Whilst thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondners
For this younig ffHanger wand'ring from his home,,
And like an orphan cast upon my czre.
I will protect thee, said I to myself,
With all my power,- and grace with all my favour.

Anna. Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a. resolve.

Yott mtul, my noble dame, exert your power:
You mufl awake: devices will be fiamn'd,
And arrowspointed at the breast of Norval.

Lady R. G!enalvon's false and crafty head will work:.

Againlt a rival in his kinfinan's love,
It I deter him not; I only can.
Bold as he is, Glenalvon will beware.
How he pulls down the fabric that I ratfe.
I'll be the artilt of-young. Norval's fortune;.

'Tis pleasing to admire! mnof apt was I.
To this affe,fienl in my better days.;.

' Though now I seem to you shrunk up, retir'd-,

W:thin the narrow compass of my wod.
Have )ou not fomnetimes seen an early flower,
Open its bud, and spread its silken leaves,
To catch fiVeet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in its leaves, .
And, though fill living, die to fcent.and beauty?.

B 3 ' '- mblemi

* Emblem of fte; affliaiob, iike'aftorm,
· Hath kill'd the forward bloffrm of my heart.'

Enter Glenalvon.

Glen. Where is my dearest kinsman, noble Randolph?
Ladr R. Have you not heard-, Glenalvon, of the base-
Glen. I have; and that the villains may not 'cape,

With a fireng band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of Randolph hir'd their fwordsi
Ot if-

Lady R. That care becomesa kinsman's love.
I have a counfei for Glenalvon's ear. [Exit Annoe

Glen. To him your counsels always are commands.
Lad R. I have not found so; thou art known to me.
Glen. Known !
Lady R. And mol certain is my cause of knowledge.
Glen. What do you know ? By Heavet,

You much amaze me. Nocreated thing,
Yourself except, durst thus accost me.

Lady R. Is guilt so bold ? and dost thou make a merit

Of thy pretended meekness ?' This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conceal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing; or, what's worse than that,
An outcast beggar, and uhpitied too:
For mortals lhudder at a crime like thine.

Glen. Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind!

Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transpor-ts beyond firia virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied canndt be; Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is beftow'd:
For mortals know that love is still their lord,
And o'er their vain refoives advances still:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Through the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Li'y R. Reserve these accents for some other ear.

To love's apology I lifen not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou flouldft.
lis brave deliverer Randolph here retains.

Perhaps

Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at thy peril, prafifeought againft.him;
Let not thy jealousy attempt to Ihake
And loosen the good root be has in Randolph;
Whose favourites I know thou hist fupplanied.
Thou look'ft at me, as if thou fain would'st piy
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless stranger my proteo&ion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

Glen. Child that I was, to Hart at my own .fadow,

And be the fllallow fool of coward conscience!
I am not what I have been ;: what fihould be.
The darts of destiny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had Ione grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I should conclude there was an arm above
That fought againfi me, and:malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means!
Th' imperfect rape to Randolph gave a fpouf;
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worftof all, a rival. 'Burning hell !
This were thy center, if I thought fhe-lov'd himn!
'Tis certain Ihe contemns me; nay, commands met
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And ihall I thus bebrav'd ?
Curb'd,.as she calls it, by dame Chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up, and fill my bosom with your fires.
' And policy remorseless i Chance may- spoil
' A single aim; but perseverance must
' Proper at last. For chance and fate are words
' Perfiftive wisdom is the fate of man.'
Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rising in the east,
Crofs'd and divided by ilrage,-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the slave who-came wih Norval hither,

And

# ACT III.

And for his cowardice was spurned from him,
I've known such follower's rankled bosom breed
Venom most fatal to his heedless lord. [Exit.

END of the SECOND ACT.

: A C T III.
SCENE, a Court, &c. as before.:

Enter Anna.,

ANNA.

SHY vassals, grief, great nature's order break,
And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady Randolph sleeps, : will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may herflumbers be! Ye ministers
Of giacious heaven wholove the human rate,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodnels !
Forlake your skies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chafe thofe.difinal forms
That haunt her waking; her fld spir.it charm
With images celefiial, such as please .
The bleIt above upon their golden beds.

Enter Servant,

Ser. One of the vile assassins is .fecur'd.

We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
His firit essay: these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the fpnils of some that he has mur('er'd.

Anna. Let me look on them. Ha ! here is a heart,

The chosen crcft of Douglas' valiant name !
These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

[Exit Anna,

Enter

ERter Servants with a Prif/nerv

Pri/. I know no more than does the-child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

I. Sfr. You fay so, Sir!

But torture soon shall make you speak the truth,
Behold, the Lady of Lord Randolph comes;
Prepare yourself to meet herjuft revenge.

Enter Lady Randolph and Anna.

Anna. Summon your utmost fortitude, before

You speak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at fake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady Ran. Thou Ihaltbehold me, with adefperateheart,
Hear how my infant perifi'd. See, he kneels.

[The Prijntr kneel.'

Prif. Heav'n bless that countenance so sweet and mild !

A judge like thee makes innocence'more bold.
Oh, save me, lady ! from there cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me;' who acctfe
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at thejudgment-feat of heaven,-
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grafi,
Is not more innocent ihan I of murder.
Lady R. Of this man'a guilt what proof can ye pra'

dude ?

Ifl Ser. We found him lurking in the-hollow glynni

When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd he fledi
We overtook him, and enqtfir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upoi.his journey to the camFp.
Not satisfied with this, we fearch'd his clothes,
.And found there jewels; whole rich value plead
Molt powerfully against him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us to try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.

Prif. Oh, gentle lady ! by your Lord's dear life;

Which these weak hands, I tivear, did ne'er assail;
And by your children's welfare, spare my age !
Let not the iron tear my ancientjoints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.
Lady R. Account for these; thine own they cannot be:

For

For these, I fay: be lfedfafi to the truth;
. DeteCed falflood is most certain death.

[Anna remiovse theJfervants and returns,

Prif. Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never man,

For fake of lucre, fin against his foul t
Eternaljuflice is in this most just!
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal;

Lady R. Oh! Anna hear !--once more I charge thee

The truth dire&; for these to me foretel [speak
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

Prif. Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as julf

As if you were the minilter of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.
Some eighteen years ago, I rented land,
Of brave Sir Malcolm, then Balarmo's Lord;
But falling to decay, his servants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turn'd me and mine,
(Four helpless infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Received us: there hard labour, and the hkill
In filhing, which was formerly my.fport,.
Supported life. Whilll thus we poorly liv'd,
One tormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and an d

louand oft

The angry spirit of the-water fliriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. I rose, and ran
To where'the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach .whatever floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; -the person los :
But looking fad and earnell on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A baflet: soon I drew. it to the bank,
And nefiled curious there an infant lay...

Lady -R, Was he alive ?
Prif. He was; - .

* - * ri~~~Ldy

Lady R. Inhuman that thou art '

How couldst thou kill what waves and tempeits spared ?

Prif. I ai not so inhuman.
Lad R. Didft thou'not ?
Antna. My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much;

This man has not the afpectof flern murder;
Let him go on, and you, I hope, will hear
Good tidings of your kinfmaa's-long loft child.

Prif. The needy man, who has known better days,

One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To dd such deeds as makes the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them,
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touch'd that infant vith a hand of harm.

Lady R. Ha ! dost thou fay so; then perhaps he lives I
Pr/f. Not many days ago he was alive.
LadyR. Oh ! heavenly powers! Did 'he then die so
Prif. I did not fay-he died; I hope he lives. [lately:?

Not many.days ago theSe eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady R. Where is he now ? -.
Prif. Alas ! I know not where.
Lady R. Oh, fate! I fear thee fill.: Thou riddler,

Diret and clear; else I will search thy foul. [speak

Anna,. 'P-enmit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience,

4 Though hard to be refirainid, defeats itself.'-
Pursue thy story with a faithful tongue, : ·
To the last hour that thou didf keep the child.

Prif. Fear not my faith, thought muilfpeak myfliame.

Within the cradle where the infant lay, *
Was ftow'd a mighty ltoreof gold and jewels;
Tempted'by which, we did retolveto hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of pur estate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our]ecret wealth. But God's all-feoing eye
Beheld our avarice, and finote us fore.

For

For one by one all our own children died,
Andi'hethe;ranger, .sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. .Fain.then:would I,
Who with a father's fondness. lv'd the .boy,
Have .trusted hiim; now in the-dawn.of youth,
With his own:fecret: :but-my qnxious'wife,
Forboding evil, never would cqnfent.
Mean whilethe stripling grew in.years and beauty;
And, .as we oft obferv'd, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring:of our cottage:blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
Andnight and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I set myself agaiinf his warlike bent;
But all in vain; for when.a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came--r

La4y R. Eternal Providence ! -What is thy. name-?
.Pr/f' vly nameis Norval; and-my'nSme he.bears.
Lady R. 'Tis he ! 'tis he himnfelf! It is my fio !

.Oh, sovereign mercy ! 'Twas my child.I saw!'
No wotnder, Anna, that my.bofonm burn'd.

Aina. JuR are-your transports: 'ne'er was vwomais's

:heart .

' Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dasme'
But yet remember that you.are-beheld
'By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
Impaffion'd, flrange; perhaps your wordsd'erheard.

La.dy R. Well.doft thou counsel, Anna; -Heav'n be-
On me that;wifdom.which my iate requires. :C[Rlow

Anna. Themoinents of deliberation-pafs,

s And soon youtmul.erefolve. This useful. nn
c 'Muf :be dismissed with safety, ere my -Lord
' Shall with hisbrave deliverer return.'

Prif. If I, ainidltaftoniflment and fear,

Have of your words and geltures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter ot my ancien't matier;
The child I refcud'd from the flood.is thine.

Lazy'R.'With theediflimulation now were.vain.

I am indeed the daughter of Sir Ialcolmn;
The child thou' refcu'd! from the flood is mine.

Pr.f Blest be tl-e hour th;it made.me a poor man!
My poverty hath fav'd my master's house !

3 Land

LaSy R. Thy words furprize me; sure thou dost not

feign !

The tear stands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir Malcolm's houfe'deferv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the story of thy own distress.

PrJf Sir Malcolm of our barons was theflower;

The fastest friend, the best and kindest master.
But, ah ! he knew not of tily fad estate.
After thebattle, where his gallant son,
Your own brTive brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew delperate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erst was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduEt of his servants,
By them I was-thruft out, and them I-blame:
May Heav'n so judge me as I judge my mafler!
And God so love me as I love his race!

Lady R. His race shall yet reward thee. On thy faith

Depends the fate of thy lov'd master's house.
Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
Tthat like a holy hermitage appears
Among the cliffs of Carron ?

Prif. . remenber

The cottage of the cliffs.

Lady R. 'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
1'Till I laill call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and iobles, what thou now
To me haft told;' No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long shall call thee father flill,
And all the land shall bless the man who fav'd-
The son of Douglas and Sir Malcolm's heir.
Remember well my words; if thou flouldft meet
Him whom thou call'it thy son, ftill-call him so;
And mention nothing of his noble'father.

Prif. Fear not that I (hall mar so fair an harvefli

By puttingin my fickleere'tis ripe.
Why did I leave my home and ancient dame ?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms,

C Whkh

Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the secret of his noble birth,

[Lady Randolphgoes towards tieefervants.

Lady R. This man is not th' zfiiffin you fufpe.ed,

Though chance combin'd some likelihoods againfl him.
H-e is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in hafie he seeks.
'lis meet that you flould put him on his way,
:Since your miltaken.zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

.[Exeunt Stranger and Selrvaants

My faithful Anna ! dolt thou fliare my joy ?
I know thou doff. Unparallel'd event!
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm'
Snatch'A from the waves, and brings to me my son !
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father,
Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
Ror such a gift ! What does my Anna think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nefl ?
How soon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire !

Anna. How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !

Myflerious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inltin&t, drew you to your own.

Lady R. The ready flory of his birth believ'd

.Supprefl my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my so sudden favour;
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The linea!nents of Douglas, or my own.
But mofl of all, I long to let hin knlow
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the flory of his father.

Anna. With wary caution you muff bear yourself

in public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in obfetvers stir conjeftures strange.

For, if a cherub in the fape of woman
c Should walk this world, yet defamation would,

Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train.'-
To-day the baron ilarted at your tears.

Tady R. He did so, Anna! well thy mifirefs knows,
if the least circumflance, mote of offence,

Should

Should touch the baroins eye, his fight would be
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It does behove me instant to declare
The birth.of Douglas, and aficrt his rights.
This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the-fecret and'confult with him:
For'wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, folook'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease: his mien, his fpeechr,
Were fweedy simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'ai his rmighty mind,.
Up rose the hero; on his piercing eye
Sat Observation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flafih.

Anna. That demon haunts you ffill:

Behold GlenalVton.

Lady R. Now I'fhun him not.

This day I brav'd'him in behalf of'Norval't:
Perhaps too far: at least my nicer fears
For Douglas thus interpret.

Ezter Glenalvon.

Glen. Noble dame!

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed':'
No band of pirates; buht a'mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers:
To win a country, or to lose themselves.

Lady R. But whence comes this intelligence, Glenal-
Glen. A'nimble courier sent from yonder camp, [vonb

To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pass'd, that the fierce, Dane
Had on the eastern coast of Lothian landed,
' Near to that place where the'fea-rock immense,

Amazing bass, looks o'er a fertile land..
' Lady R. Then mufl this western army march tojoinj,
* The warlike troops that guard Edena's tow'rs.

Glen. Beyond all queltion. If impairing time

' Has not effac'd the image of a place,

Once perse& in my breast, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp

C 2 Of

Of water-wafted armies, whose chief ftrengtb
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse
If martial Ikill dire&s the Danifi lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our fwift-fcow'ring horle, the bloody field

' Must man to mail, and foot to foot, be fought.'

Lady R. How. many mapthers ihall bewail their sons !

How many widows weep their bufband's slain
Ye dames of Denmark, ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat flore,
Long look for lords that never fliall return.

Glen. Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian fwordt

Widow'd the north. Th, children of the f.lina
Come, asI hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monfier war, with her infernal brood,.
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objeEs suited to Glenalvon's foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;.
Reproach, more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady R. I scorn thee not, but when 1 oughtlto scorn m

Nor e'er reproach, but when.in.fulted virtue
Against audacious vice afrerts herself.
I own thy worth, Glenavon.; none imore'apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy, martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty passion
Go and purnue. lawful fjiltrels, Glory.
Upon the Dafiifh crets redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the flhield of Randolph..

Gleqk. Qae i ai t atay, and hear an alter'd mnan,

When beauty pleads. for virtue, vice abalh'd
Flies its OWO| nP,9ljto

;S, and goes o'er to vjii te.

I am your coiIxqt p tinevwill shew how truly:
Yet one iijg e4dite pQroof I mtlen to give.
That youth for vhom Xyo,tr ardent zeal to-day,
Soewhhat top haughtily, defy'd your lave,
Amidfi the floc.k of arrnies I'll defend,
And turn dea t from him, with a guardian. a. m.
' Sedate by use, my. bpfoin imadens not
C At the tumultuotus uproar of the field.'

Lady R. A, thus, Glenalvon, and I am thy friend
But that's thy leaftre. ard. Believe me, Sir,

Thes

The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady Randolph..

Glen. [Solus.] Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !-

I thinkithat I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak.' Honey'd assent,
How p!;ifing art thou to the taste of man,,
And woman alo ! flattery direa
Rarely difguits. They little know mankind!
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,
Atid opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now, I know not..
Yet I incline to think her flormy virtue
Is lull'd awhile: 'tis her alone I fear:.
Whilst fie and Randolph live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.

F' ate o'er my head suspends disgrace and deathi,

' By that weak air, a peerifli female's will..

I am not idle; but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.'.

That slave of Norval's I have found most apt::
I ihew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul:
To fay and swear wlatever I fugget.
Norval, I'm told, has that alluring look,
' rwixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd:
To charm the nicer and fantaflic dames,
Who are, like Lady Randolph, full of virtue.
In raising Randolph's jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

END of the TpIRD ACT..

C 3 ACT

# ACT IV.

AC T IV.

flow rili of Trurpes.,
Enter Lord Randolph atlendtid

LOAD RANDOLPH.

CUmmon an hundred horse, by break of day,
S To wait our pleafire at the castle gate.

*Enter Lady Randolph.

Lady R. Alas, my Lord i I've heard unwelcome news,.

The Danes arelanded.

Lord R. Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a spoil:
No sportive war, no tournament essay,
Of some young knight refolv'd to break a spear,.
And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danesare landed: we must beat them back,
Or live the slaves of Denmark.

Lady R. Dreadful times!
Lord R. The fenceless villages are all forsaken;

The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilst the men
Retire indignant. Yet like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady R. Immense, as fame reports, the Daniflh holt
Lord R. Were it as numerous as loud fame reports,

An army knit like ours would pierce it through ::
Erothers, that flrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,.
The huftand, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breasts heroic ardour burns,
And the poor peasant mates his daring lord.

Lady R. Men's minds are temper'd, like their fwordi,

for war;

' Lovers of danger, on deftruftion's brink
' They joy to rear eret their daring forms.
. Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;

LAnd

* And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd. age.'
-Where is our gallant guest ?

Lord R. Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery fieed,
Whose tfubbornnefs had foil'd the tfrength and lkill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,.
In earnef conversation with Glenalvon.

Enter Norval and. Glenalvon.

Glenalvon ! with the lark arise; go forth,
And lead my troops that lie in yonder vale r
Private I travel to the royal camp -
Norval, thou goeft with me. But fay, young man, !
Where didft thou learn so to discourse of war,
And in such termr,, as I o'erheard to-day?
War is no village science, nor its phrase
A language taught among the fliepherd: vfains..

Not. Small is the skill my Lord delights to praise

In him he favours. Hear from whence it came..
Beneath a mountain's brow, themoft remote
And inacceifible by fhepherdq trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,.'
A hetmit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring swains,
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,.
Water his drink, his food the ilepherds' alms,
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'.d.
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entering on discourse, such stories toldi
As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,,
Against th' usurping infidel difplay'd
The blessed crols, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man would 'fiake
His years away, and aaf his young encounters:
Then, having fIew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshal'd hofls

Defcrib'd

Defcrib'd the motions, and explain'd the use
Of the deep column, and the lengthen'd line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firmr
For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.

LordR. Why did this foldierin adefart hide
Those qualities, that (hould have grac'd a camp ?

Nor. That too at las I learn'd. Unhappy man !

Returning homeward by AMeffina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought;
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty pow'r !
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh, my brother!'

Lady R. His brother!
Nor. Yes;. of the fame parents born;

His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness::
And happy, in my mind, was he that died ;
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd.
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on some nameless Itream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfct mind,
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghost';
And oft each night forsakes his ful!en couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady R. To what mysterious woes are mortals born !'

In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons r Did the parents.live ?

Nor. No, they were dead; kind Heaven clos'd their
Before their son had. shed his brother's. blood. [eyes),

Lord R. Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame!

There is a destiny in this flrange world,
Which oft decrees an unideifrved doom.
Let fchoolmen tell us why-From whence these founds ?

[Tirmpcts a a dilance,

Enmtr an Offi er.

Of. My Lord, the trumpet s of the troops of Lorn:

Their valiant leader hails the noble Randolph;

Lord R. Mine ancient guelt ! Does he the warriors
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ? [lead-?

Ofr.

Of. No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.

Hiseldeft hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord R. Glenalvon, go.

With hospitality's most firong request
Entreat the chief. [Exit Glenalvon.

Of. My Lord, requetfs are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the fe's approach.

Lord R. May viEtory fit on the warrior's plume!

BraveR of men ! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his patures lies
By mountains inaccessible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he int9 the plain descends,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world;
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
But still, for love of glory and of arms, ;
Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each firong antagoniff the spear. .
I'll go and press the hero. to my breaf .[E.xlti th b Oft.

Lady R. Th£foldier's loftiLeifs, the pride andpona '

Investing awful war, Norrval, I foe,
Transport thy youttful mind.

No'r. Ah! -ibould they not?

Blefs'd be the hour left ryfather's houe ,!
I might have been a Iheph,erd a, my days,
And stole obfcu rely to a p.easant's. gave.
Now, if I live, with mnighty chiefs'I stand;
And, if I fall, ivith ndoble dft I lie.

Lay R. There ips a generous spirit in thy break

That could have well fiufain'd a proder fortune.
Some lucky chance has, left us h eye alonq.
Unseen, unheard, by hu!an eye oy ear,
I will amaze thee with a iyond'rous tale.

Nor. Let there be danger, Lady, with the secret,

That I mnay hug it to my gratel heart,
And prove my faith. Co mipmand my fwrd, mylife:
There are the sole Eoffeffilos of po or N lrval.

Lady R. Know'il thou these gems
Nor. Durst I believe mine eyes,
Id' fay I knew them, and they were my father's,

La.dy R

-Ladty R. Thy father's fay'ft thou ? Ah, they were thv
Nor. I saw them once, and curiously e.quir'd [father's!:

Of both my parents, whence such splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady R. Then learn of me, thou art not Norval's fonr.
Nor. Not Norval's son!
Lady R. Nor of a fliepherd sprung.
Nor. 'Lady, who am I then?
Lady R. Noble thou art;.

For noble was thy fire.

Nor. I will believe-

Oh, tell me farther ! Say,, who was my father r

Lady R. Douglas!
Nor. Lord Douglas, whom to-day I saw ?-
Lady R. His.younger brother..
Nor. And irt yonder camp ?
LadyR. Alas'!
Nor. You make me tremble' Sighs.and tears !'

Lives my brave father ?

Lady R. Ah too brave indeed !

He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

Nor. Ah, me unhappy ! Ere I saw the light '

But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

LadyR. She lives; but waftes her life in constant wo,

Weeping her'hutbandflain, her infant loft..

Nor. You that are flill'd so well.in the fad flory

Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their defliny, now have compantion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.'
Oh, tell me who and Where my mother is!
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps hle bendsa
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And, desolate, implores of Heaven the aid'
Her son Ihould give. It is, it mull be so--
Your countenance confesses that fle's wretched.
Oh, tell me her condition! Can the sword --
Who shall refifl me in a parent's cause ?

Lady R. Thy virtue ends her woe-My son! my son !
Nor. Art thou my mother?
Lady. R. I am thy mother, and the wife of Douglas L

[Falls upon his neck.

Nor..

Nor. Oh, heav'n and earth! how wond'rous is my fate!

E.ver let me kneel !

Lady R. Image of Douglas! fruit of fatal.love!
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.

Nor. Refpe&t and admiration flill possess me,

,Checking the love and fondnes of a son:
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my fire furpals the refi of men,
.As thou excelielt all of womankind ?i -

Lady R. Arise, my son. In me thou dot behold

The poor remains of beauty once admir'd.
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer hafie away.
Yet in my prime I equall'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the.eagle's, yet Sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

Nor. How did he fall? Sure 'twas a bloody field

When Douglas died. Oh, I have much to alk!

Lady R. Hereafter thou shalt hear the lengthen'd tale

Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At prefent.this-Thou art the rightful heir
*Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord Randolph, as my husband, holds.
But thou fialt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still. Before the King I'll kneel,
And call Lord Douglas to.protec. his blood.

Nor. The blood of Douglas will protea itself.
Lady R. But we shall need both friends and favour, boy,

To wrelt thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of Randolph and his kinfinan. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

Nor. To be the son of Douglas is to me

,Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field I'll seek for fame and fortune.

Lady R. Thou dost not know what perils and injunlice

Await the poor man's valour. Oh, my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abafl'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended Douglas,
Too long hafl thou been deem'd a peasant's child.

The

'The'.anton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee in the youthful fpbrts,
Whilst thy indigiiant'fpirit fivll'd invain.
Such contumely thou nohiore shalt bear:
But how I'purpofe to redress thy wrongs
Must be hereafter told. Prtdence dire6ts
That we (hould part before'yoh chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rufiic fdllower's hand
Receive a billet,' which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, diatated before
This casual opportuiity arose
Of private conference, Its purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my on.; and frame thy manners still
To Norval'sj not to noble Douglas' Rate.

Nir. I will remember. Where is Norval nov ?

That good old.man.

Lady R. At hand cohceal'd he-lies,

An useful witn'ess. Bat beiare, my son,
Of yon Glenalvdn ;' in his guilty breast
Resides a villain's fhrevwdnefs, ever prone
To false conjecure, He hath griev'dmiy heart.

Nor. Has he indeed'? Then let yon false Glenalvon
Beware of me.[Et

Lady'R. Thfreburit tlie'fm'other'd flame.

Oh, thouall-righteous'and eternal King!
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protet my son ! Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bof6'/n with that sacred fire,
Which in tlihebiraffs of his forefathers burn'd:
Set him on high., like them, that he may flside
The star and glory of his natiie land !
Then let the miiiller of deaih'defcend,
And bear my willing fpiritto its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find.
Unchanging'arpefts to conceal their guilt,
When I, by reafodn and by juftice'urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause ?

Enter Lord Randolph and Glehalton;

Lord R. Yon-gallant chief,
Of arm's enambur'drall repose disclaims,

2:a RL. a

lay R. Be not, my Lord, by his example fway'd.

Arrange the butinefb of to-morrow now,
And when you enter speak of war no more. [Exit.

Lord R. 'Tis so, by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her
And herimpatiehce to begone, confirm it. [eye,

Glen. He parted from her now. Behind the mount,

Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord R. For fadfequefterd virtue flie's renown'd.
Glen. Aloft true, my Lord.
Lord R. Yet th s diftinguifh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to-meet her at the midnight hour.
This aflignation, [Shews a lktter.] the affaflin freedj
Her manifest aflection for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a hutband's brain,
Whole gentle consort all for love had wedded:
Much imoe in mine. Matilda never lov'dme.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed
W3hose heart he knows he has not; though she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry.
For let her feeni, like the night's lladowy queen,
Cold and contemrplative-he cannot truli her;
She rm:i, flie will bring (liame and foirow on him;
1 he worlt of sorrow, and the worst of aimrnes I

Gler. Yield not, miv Lord, to fich affllitilgthoughts;

But let the ipirit of an lufbadd steep,
Till your own senses make a sure conclufon.
This b:llet muff to blooming Norval go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his mailer.
In the close thicket take your secret Iland;
The moon fliines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

LordR. Thou dolt counsel well,
Glen. Permit me now to make one flight essay.

Of all the trophies whic:h vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairest in a young man's eye,
Iswoiman's captive heart. Succe'sfui love
W.iithglorious stimes intoxicates the mind,
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves,
Air-bdrn, exalted above vulgar men.

D Lord

Lord R. And what avails this maxim?
Glen. Much, my Lord.

Withdraw a little; I'll accost young Norval,
And with ironical derisive counsel
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
T'han humble Norval, by thy favour rais'd,
Brave as he is, he'll flrink allonifl'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd.by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord R. 'Tis shrewdly thought,
Glen. When we grow loud; draw near. But let my Lord

His rising wrath restrain. [Exit Randolph.
'Tis strange, by Heav'n !
That flhe flould run full tilt her fond career
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream. when ice imbofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaste,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious sex !
Whose deeds lascivious pass Glenalvon's thoughts !

Enter Norval.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd. [S'/e,
Has Norval seen the troops ?

Nor. The setting fun

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale;
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Corflet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more thnn mo tal size, tow'ring, they feem'd
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

Glen. Thou talk'it it well; no leader of our host

In founds more lofty fpedks of glorious war.

Nor. If I fIall e'er acquire a leader's name,

My speech will be less ardent. Novelty.
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise pertA:ining to the great in arms. [deeds

GACn. You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial

Have rank'd you with the great. But mark me, Norval;
Lord Randolph's favour now exalts your youth

Above

Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know there soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour: seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, nor birth adorns.

Nor. Sir, I have been accuftom'd all my days

To hear and speak the plain and simple truth;
And tho' I have been told that there are men
Who borrow friendship's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little fkill'd.
Therefore I thank Glenalvon for his counsel,
Although.it.founded hardily.' Why remind
MIeof my birth obscure? Why slur my power
With fich contemptuous terms ?

Glen. I did not mean

To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

Nor. My pride!
Glen. Suppress it, as you with to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet, for Randolph's fake,
I will notleave you to its rash direction.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Think you, will they endure a fnepherd's scorn ?

Nor. A shepherd's scorn !
Glen. Yes: if you presume

Tobend on soldiers these disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,.
And said in secret, you're no match for me,
What will become of you ?

Nor. If this were told!- [Aid,

Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous felfe

Glen. Ha! dost thou threaten me ?
Nor. Didft thou not hear ?
Glen. Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe

Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee-

Nor. Whom dost thou think me ?
Glen. Norval.
Nor. So I am-

And who is Norval in Glenalvon's eyes

Glen. A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;

At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.
Aor. Falfeas thou art, dost thou fufpea my truth ?

D 2 Gle.

Glen. Thy truth! thou'rt all a lie; and false as hell

Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'tl to Rindolphli.

Nor. If. were chain'd, unarm'd, and bed-rid old,

Perhaps I should revile; but as I an,
I hae rio tongue to rail. The humb!e Norval
Is of a race who strive not but witli deeds.
Did I nott'ear to freeze thy fiallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath rmy sword,
I'd tell thee-what thou art. I-know thee well.

Gle;. Didft thou not know Glenalvon, born to command
Ten thcufand ilaves'like thee-

Nor. Villaini, no more !

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But Heav'n accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady Randolph's wrongs.

Enter Lord Randolph.

Lord R. Hold, I command you both. The man that
Miakesmehis-foe. -" : " ::; " : ' [flirt

Nor.,'-ATbther voice than thine
That threat had vainly feouihed' noble Randolph.

Glen. Hear' hiin, my'Lord; h'h's n wbvod'rbus conde-
Mark thehdmility of fllepherd Norval'! 'tricending!

Nor. Now you may fcof in safety. [8beatbs his fbi'd,
LordR. Speak not thus, :

Taunting each other:; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then IFjudge beti'ixt you.

Nor. Nay, tiv:good'Lord, tho' 'I revere you much,

My cause I plead not, nor demand ydur judgment.'
I.blti' to speak ; I will not, -cannot speak : '
Th' opprobrious wdrds tIhat I 'fo6i hiii have borne.
To the liege-lord of'in'deai- ative land
I owe a fibjeeCt's homage: but ev'n'hihr
And his high arbitration I'd:rejec..
Within my bof6m reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge aid umpire of itleif.
If my free speech offend you, noble Randolph,
Revoke your favours, and let NorvaT go'9
Hence as he came, alone, but not difior.our'd.

Lord R. Thus far I'll mediate withi impartial voice:

The ancient foe of'Caiedonia's land . '
Now itavesi his baiiers:d'i er frighted fields.

Suspend

# ACT V.

Suspend your purpose till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

Glen. I agree to this,
Nor. And I.

Enter Servant.

Seirv. The banquet waits.
Lord R. We come. [Exit with Servant
Glen. Norval,

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of Randolph.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall fain my countenance. Sooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our ffrife disturb the gentle dame.

Nor. Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment,
When we contend again, our frife is mortal.

[Exeunt,
END of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT V.
SCENE, the Wood.

Enter Douglas.

DOUGLAS.
T HIS is the place, the centre of the grove;

Here stands the oak, the monarch of the woodQ

How sweet and solemn is the midnight scene !
The lilver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' Ikies *here I could count each litt!e star.
The fanning weft wind scarcely flirs the leaves;
The river, rushing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a stilly found.
In inch a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought believed,
Defcendiug spirits have convers'd with man,
And told the secrets of the world unknown.

D . Evetr

onter Old Norval.

OlA Nor. 'Tis he. But what it he flhould chide me
His just reproach I fear . [hence?

[Douglas turns Jifid antd Je;bhlim

Forgive, forgive,
Canst thou forgive the man, the felfiflh man,
Who bred Sir Malcolrm's'ieira fihepierd's son ?

loug. ' Kneel not to me s thou at y fatfier fill:

Thy wilh'd-for pretence now compleats my joy.
Welcome to me; my fortunes thou flalt share,
And ever honour'd with ty Douglas live.

OlNor. And dost thoii call me father Oh, my (on!

I think that I could die, to make amends'
For the great wrong I did thee ; .Tas my crime
Which in the wilderness so ibhg conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

Doug. Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'4.
Amongst the flepherds, in the humble cor,
I learn'd some lessons, which I'll not forget
When ! inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and when my vaflfls bow,
Norval flall smooth the creaed pride of Douglas.

Nor. Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !

Yet grievous are my-fears. Oh, leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers

Doag. Why should I leave them ?
Old Nor. Lord Randolph and his kinsman seek your life.
Doang. How know'ft thou that?'
Old Nor. I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the secret place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuflom'd path
That to the calle leads. Whilst thus Irang'd,
I was alarm'd with unexpe&ed founds
Of earnest voices. On the perfonscame.
Unseen I lurk'd, and heard them;name
Each other as they talk'd, Lord Randolph this,
And that Glenalvon. Still of you they spoke,
And of the Lady threatening was their fpeecb,
Tho' but imperfe&tly my earcould hear it,

eta;-' ---'' TsTwas

'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry ;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Doug. Rievenge ! for what ?
Old Nor. For being what you are,

Sir Malcolm's heir: how elle have you offended?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat muling how I belt might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpose,
But I could think of none. At last, perplex'd,
I issued forth, encompafling the tower
With many a weaiy itep and willful look.
Now Providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your toocourageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

Doug. I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of Glenalvon's baseness
But I will not.fufpedl the noble Randolph.
In our encounterwith thevileaflaffins,
I mark'd his brave demeanour: him I'il trult.

Old Nor. I fear you will, too far.
Doug. Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: Ihelhall know
What thou hall told: lier counsel I will follow.
And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You mufl depart: your presence may prevent
Our interview.

Old Nor. My blefling reft upon thee !

Oh, may Heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee flill;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine! [Exih4

Doug. He loves me like a parent;

And must not, ihall not, lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day ! how haft thou chang'd my state !*
Once on the cold, and winter-fiiaded fide
Of a bleak hill mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil;.
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious liars ! high heaven's resplendent host !
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd. .
- . . ' Heat

Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wifih
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May Heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To-give a bold defiance to our host!
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like Douglas conquer, or, like Douglas die;

Enter Lady Randolph.

Lady R. My son ! I heard a voice-
Doug. The voice was mine.
Lady R. Didft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,

That thus in dulky shades, at midnight hours,
By fealth the mother and the son should meet ?

[Emnbracing him.

Doug. No; on this happy day, this better birth-day,

My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady R. Sad fear and melancholy still divide

The empire of my breast with hope and joy.
Now hear what I advise-

Doug. First, let me tell

What may the tenor of your counsel change,

Lady R. My heart forebodes some evil.
Doug. 'Tis not good- :

At eve, unseen by Randolph and Glenalvon,
The good old Norval in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
With dreadful threat'nings; you they sometimes nam'd,
'Twas firange, they laid, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenue.

Lady R. Defend us, gracious God! we are betray'd z

They have found out the secret of thy birth;
It must be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir Malcolm's heir is come to claim his own,
And they will be reveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait
A darker and more silent hour, to break
Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, Heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee t'
Fly to the camp, iny son !

Doug. And leave you here ?

No: to the castle let us go together,
Call up the antient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.

Tben.

Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breadss bofiren one spark remains
Of sacred love, 'fidelity, or pity,
Some in yourcaufe will arm. I a(k but few
To drive those fpoile: s from my father's house.

Lady R. Oh, 'Nature, Nature! what can check thy

Thou genuine offspring of the daring Douglas ! [force ?
But ruli not on destruction: save thyself,
And I am.fafe. To me they mean rioharm.
Thy stay but rilks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee. to the camp.
Instant demand admittance to Lord Douglas;
Shew him there jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will ifake him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will soon confirm.

Doug. I yield me, and obey': but yet my heart

Bieeds at this parting. Something bids me.gtay
And guard a mother'slife. tOft.have I read
Of wondrous deedsby'one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two ; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any fhieldcan guard Glenalvop.

Lady .R. Ifthou rearadft-thy mother, or reer't

Thy fathers memoy, thk of

th ikhis no more.

One thing ,Iiave to fay before we part:
Long wert thou-loft , and thou art found, my child,
In a most fearful season'. Var and.battle
I haye great cause to dread. - Too well I fee
Which way the current'of thy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope !
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the reign,
To-morrow I may lodfe my son for ever.
The love of the'e before thou faw'ft the light,
Sulhain'd my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou Ihalt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this ivwae world ! My foin, remember me !
: Doiug. What shall I fay ? How can I give you comfort ?
The God of Battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you ! forwhofe dear fake
] will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name

That

That which I boait founds amongst martial men,
How will inglorious caution suit my claim?
The post of fate unlhrinking I maintain.
My country's foes must witncfs who I am.
On the invader's heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes confess the genuine train.
If in this strife I fall, blame notyour son,
Who if he lives not honotr'd, mull not live.

Lady R. I will not utter what my bosom feels.

Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewel, my on ! my counsels are but vain. rEmbracingo
And as high Heaven hath will'd it all must be. [Separate.
Gaze not on me, thbu wilt mistake the path;
I'll point it out again. [Jtfl as they areJfepaating

Enter from the wood Lord Randolph and Glenalvon.
LordR. Not in her presence.
Now-

Glen. I'm prepar'd.
LordR. No: I command thee flay.

I go alone it never fiall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the moll compleat. [Exit.

[Glenalvon makes fomefleps to the fame fide of the

Jfage, liJtens andfpeaks.

Glen. Demonsof death,. come fettle on my sword,

And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both must die.

LordR. [Behind theefenes.] Draw, villain! draw .
Doug. [Without.] Aflail me not, Lord Randolph;

Not as thou lov'll thyself. [Claihing offwords.

Glen. [Running out.] Now is the time.
Enter Lady Randolph, at the oppofiteide of thefiage,

faint and breathleJs.

Lady R. Lord Randolph, hear me; all shall be thine
But spare ! Oh, spare my son ! [own:

Enter Douglas. writh afword in each hand.

Doug. My mother's voice!
I can protet thee still.

Lady R. He lives, he lives;

For

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise!
But fore I law thee fall.

Doug. It was Glenalvon.

Just as my arm had inafer'd Randolph's sword,
The viliain came behind-me: but 1 flew him. [child,

Lad 'R. Behind thee! Ah ! thou'rt wounded ! Oh, my

How pale thou look'ft ! And flall I lose thee now ?

Dong. Do not despair: I feel a little faintness;

I hope it will not last. [Leans upon hisJfvord.

Laly R. There is no hope !

And we muf part! The hand of death is on thee !
O mny beloved child ! O Douglas, Douglas !

[Douglas growolg more and snore faint..

Doug. Too soon we part: I have not long been Dou-

O defliny ! hardly thou deal't with me: [glas.;
Clouded and hid, a firanger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I've liv'd.

Lajv R. Has Heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like this?
)Doing. Oh, had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle! .
Like them I should have finil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to peridi by a villain's hand !
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
Which fiever mortal was so fond to run. ,
Laury R. Hear juflice; hear! are these the fruits of

virtue ? [Douglasfalls.

Doug. Unknown I die; no tongue illall speak of me.-

Some noble spirits, judging by themselves
May yet conjeture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame:
But who shall comfoirt thee ?

LatLy R. Despair, despair !
Dcug. Oh, had it pleased high Heaven to let me live
A little whiie !- my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apacc ! my m,ther- [Dies.

Ente' Lord Randolph and Anna.

LordR. Thv wivods, thy words of truth, have pierc'd

I am the fiain of knighthood and of arms. [my heart;
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

Anna. Als ! look there, my Lord.
LordR. The mother and her son! How curfl I am !

Was

Was I the au N I was

the caue

N ws bthe e.

Yon matchless villain did seduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.
, Anna. My lady lives:
The agony of grief hath but fupprefs'd
A while her powers.

LodR. But my deliverer's dead !
' The world did once esteem Lord Randolph well,

S incere of heart, for spotless honour fain'd
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd '
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now pall thenoon oflife, ihamecomes upon me;
Repioach, and infamy, and public hate,

' Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
' That Randolph basely flabb'd Sir'Malcolm's heir.'
Lady R. [Recovering.] Where am I now ? Still in

this wretched world!

Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.

My youth was'worn in anguish: but youth's fliength,
With hope's affiflance; bore the brunt offorrow;

£ And train'd me oni to be the objeft nov,
£ On which Omnipotence displays itself,

Making a fpedicle, a tale of me,
. To awe its vflal; man.'

: LorR.. Oh, mnifery !

Amiidft thy raging grief I mufl proclaim
My inito&nce.

Lady R. Thy innocence !
Lord R. My guilt
Is innocence, compar'd with whai thou think'i it.

Lady R. Of thee I think not :. what have.I to do

With thee, or any thing? M fy' fn ! my son i
My beautiful! mybrave! howvproud was'I
Of thee, and of thy valour !n my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a. race:of thine,
Who 'might-make ui to rhmetheir father's childhood,
And' bear my brother's and my hulband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead'!' A little while
Was I a wife! a mother not so long!
What am I now ?-I kfnw.-But I fiallbe

That

That only whilt. I p!ease:; for such a son ' :
And such a hubiand drive me to my fate. [Runs ourt

Lord R. Follow her, Anna: I myself would follow,
But in this rage ihe mull abhor ny- presence

' [Exit Anna.

Enter Old Norval.

Old Nor. I heard the voice of woe: Heaven guard my
LordR.l. Already istihe idle gaping crowd, [child

The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on Randolph.; -
Begone.. . .

OldNloi. I fear thee not. I IAill not go.

Here I'll remain. I'm aiiaccomplice, Lord,
With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did.help
To crush down to the ground.this lovely plant.
Oh, noblet youth that eeri yet was born'
Sweetest and best, gentlel and braved spirit,
That evei blefs'd the world ! Wretch that I am,'
Who saw that noble spirit fwvell and rife :
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it ?
Yet never was by'all thy virtues won
To do thee justice, and reveal the secret, -
Which timely known, had rais'd thee'far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now !
These are the hairs that fliould have Arew'd the gr6und,
And not the locks of Douglas. '

.

* [Tears his hair, ancd throws hinfelf epon theground.
Lord R. I know thee now: ' thy boldness I forgive:
My crest is fallen.' For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee relt.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punifil.
Cuis'd, curs'd Glenalvon, he e cap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and tury to the last,
Curling his conqueror, the felon died.

Enter Anna..

Anna. My Lord! My Lord!
LordR. Speak: I can hear of horror.
Anna. Horror, indeed!
Lord R. Matilda ?
Anna. Is no more:

She ran, flie flew like light'ning up the hill,
,Nor halted till the precipice (he gain'd,

E Beneath

Beneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither Ihe came,
As fearless asheeagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

'Lord R-'Twas I, alas! 'twas I

That fill'd herbreaft with fry ; drone her down
The precipice of death ! Wretch that I am i

4.na. Oh, had you feenher las dcfpairing look!
Upon thebrink khe good, and cast her eyes
Down in the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to tis fle plung'd herelf
Into the emnpty air.

Lord R. I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the pafllon of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of Randolph gave;
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate
Denounce my doom, I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside mull threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy mistress, take this ring,
Fullwarrantofmypower. Let every rite
With cofi andpomp upon their funerals wait:
For Raidolph hopes he never ihall return.

fExtartM
·HD of thb FIrST Acr.'

E. .

# EPILOGUE.

IE P 1 L O G U E..
AN epilogue IaJA'J; but noe one wo.rd

Our bard will write. He vows M'ii

m o a3

With comic wit to contradiit thejf rain
Of tragedy, and makeyourforrovs 'vain;
Sadly heays, thatpityis the 1es,
And noble.t palon of the human breast:
For Iwhen itsfacredJfreams the heart o'cr-Jtvow
In gujhlespleafre with Jth tide of uoe;
And whe# its waaes retire, like t/fae of Nil

ey leave behind himfuch a golden foil,
bhat there tbe rirtutswtlhout culture grcw.i
There tbefieet blodhms of afefSiio blow.

ifeweree bhis words; vqoidofddultve artr
ifelt thet for beftpo themfrom his hearst.
Nor willI w attempt wiltb wit yf!lyv
To shs SSW e mki l
miclel

T^

# Books published by J. Bell.

Boads puailjibd by J. Bell. .
T HE TREASURY; or, Repository of Politics and

Literature for 770, . The materials which these

volumes contain are the most authentic monuments by
which to arrive.at the truth of those tranfacions and
events which have so much agitated the present times,
and which are so likely to attra-t the.attention of future
ages. 2 vols. Price 12s.

R EMARKS on the ENGLISH LANGUAGE.;
: being a detetoion of many irmproper exprellons
used in conversation, and of many others to be found
in authors. ;By R Baker .. . .

:

" Mr. Baker, he. author f :there ..remarks,.,has

" pointed out a great number of 0improper expre.ssions,
"which. we, frequen.tly hear in converl'aibn, or meet
" with in books; and has subjoined many useful ob.-
" servations." Critical Review. Price I2s.. . ..

' ISCOUgSES on.,he several 'efiates of man oon

j. EARTh, in HEAVEN, and.HELL, deduced

from reason andrevelation,as they havebeep repeatedly
delivered to.crowded congregations in the abbey church
:at Bath, and -at Stp.pen's, Walbr9pk, ..Lo.ldoni
.Price 2s.'6d. , . ' ;. .i
T'HE HISTOl:Y of Sir WILLIAM HARRINQ

TON. Written some years since, and revised,

o.orpeted,. ai.,improved, by tjre latetEMr$SanliuelRith-
ardfon, auitfiorfmeia,:Cla;riffa,, Sir .Charles Grandi-
son, i&c. .ifobur-,volumes. Price ; . :
,.Tbis inteine g.ig work, besides a very extensive.
faie at home, 'has been circulated' through' Scotland,
Ireland, France and Germany. It has been gene.
rally allowed, not .nworthy' ai fituatioil :in all. libra.
ries, as supplement .to 'Richardson's. excellint
'writings;, and the eucouragement it has met, iplainly
demonltrates the approbation wherewith it has been
read.....

To this new edition, an explanatory: index .is'ad-

ded by the editor, .who takes this meains of returning
: - - .; *::. : : .;..... :.
,

his sincere thanks to the public, for the indulgent re.
ception the work has been favoured with, and afihres
them every care mhall be taken within, his ability, to,
renderit still more deserving of their attention..
T HE UNIVERSAL CATALOGUE. Containing:

a concise review of every new publication of the

preceding month, on the planof.the French catalogues;.
together with an abitra: of the opinionsof both Criti.
cal and Monthly Reviews, and every. other periodical,
work (of which there re many) that undertake to give
an account of new books;. As these opinions are
ranged under eae;other, gentlenhn will thus be better
able to judge of the merit of any pice,. than by a figiti
of a few ill-chofen extra&ts. fele&ed- by one prejudiced:
or incompetent reviewer, Besides, as the authors of
this work. do not intend to confine themfelves-to a eer
tain numberof pages, no publication of the preceeding,
month will be omitted;, asa a4vsntage the public has
not hitherto experienced, as hooks have not been re-
viewed till fome-monthaafter they have been out.

17 DWARD- and ELEONd1RA, a tragedy, as it is
.^ performed at the Theatre-Royal, Covent-Garden.
Written by TwOMsoN, and.altered by THOMAS. HULm,
Price is,

CtHE PRODIGAL SONS an- Oratori ; written by
*A Mr. HULIL, of CoventrGarden Theatre, and set
to mafic by Dr. ARNoLD. A new and improved edi
tion, embellilhed with a beautiful engraving adapted
to the fubie&.. Price Is.
R ICHA:RDPLANT AGEN-ET, a Legendariy ale;

written. by Mr. Husi, who has taken uncommon

pains in feleting every curious particular in his'power,
that might tend to confirm the authenticity of the flory,
which is founded on a very singular and pathetic event.

Mr. Sherwin- has finihed the embellifliment, under

the immediate infpeEtion of thecelebrated BAaTOLOZZz,.
i a file that will. attrat critical, approbation. The

fubjc&

fubjetts' an affecting interview between two principal
Chgara&ers in the Poem, and the effec must irresistibly
please every judicious eye. Qyarto, on very large.and
fine.paper. as. 6d.

HE FRIENDS; *or Original Letters of a person
deceased; new first published from the manu-

script in his correspondent's hands. In two volumes,
price6s. bound.
A New Edition, being the Sixth, Price as. 6d. De-

dicated, by Permiflion, to Lord Viscount Ligo-

eier. PRINCIPLES of POLITENESS. Part I. By
the late Lord CHESTERFIELD. Methodized and
digested under diftin& heads, with Additions, by the
.Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER. Containing every in-
firution necessary to complete the Gentleman and Man
of Falhion, to teach him a knowledge of life, and make
}Iim well received in a!l oompanies. For the improve-
ment of youth, yet not beneath the attention of any..
Also by the fame Author, the Fourth Edition, price
as. 6d. Addrefded to and calculated for Young Ladies.

*, At the rtqueft of several Private Tutors and

Masters of Acadmnies, the two preceding articles are
translated into French, in a caifical and elegant stile, by
the CHEVALIER DE SAUSEUIL, in two vols.
Price 7s. bound. Allowance to thoie who take a dozen
lets.

AN ESSAY on GLANDULAR. SECRETION;
A containing a ~Experimental enquiry into the for-
mation of PUS, and a:critical examination into an opi.i
aionof Mr. John Hunter's, " That the blood is alive."
By JAMES HENDY, M. D. Price 2s.

N EASY WAY to PROLONG LIFE. Part I.
The Third Edition. Price 2S. Being a Chemical

Analysis, or, ' An Enquiry intothe nature and proper-
ties of all kinds of Foods,' how far they are wholesome
and agree with different constitutions. Written so as
tobe intelligible to every capacity. By a Medical Gen-

tleman.

sleiani, Also, Part II. Price is. 6d. Containing many
salutary observations od exercise, sleep, drinking, fmoak.
ing, bleeding, dram-drinking, and the utility of taking
physic in the spring, :
THE (ECONOMIST. The Thirtdeenth Editi'd,

P- rice is. Shewing in a v'iriety:of estimates fria

Sol. a year to upwards ;of 8o61. how comfortably and
genteely a family may live with frugality for a little
money; together with the cheaper method of keeping

horses. : ' -'
;

*.* An attention to these eflimates will infallibly

tend 'to the .comfort and happiness odfthoufands, as
they will teach the reader how to make a little go a
great way, and shew him what expences he may enter
into consistent with his fortune and situation' in life,

.ENRYII. or, The FALL of ROSAMOND, a
-1 Tragedy, 'as performed at the Theatre-Royal,
Covent.Garden¥:by T. HULL; Price is. 6d. .
GENUINE .LETTERS from a GENTLEMAN

to a YOUNG. LADY, his pupil, calculated to

form the Taste, regulate the Judgment, 'and improve
the Morals. Written some years fice, now irftl revised
and published, with Notes'and Illustrations. By Mr.
THOMAS HULL, of the TheatreRoyal,.Covent.-arden.
In two neat volumes, price 6s.

_T EN MINUTES ADVICEI& a every GENTLIE-
- - MAN going to purchafejtorfe out of a dealeri
jockey, or groom's fable; in which are laid down efta-
blifhed rules for discovering the perfeEtionsaid blemilhes
of that noble animal. Price.is.
A DAM'S TAIL; or, The FIRST METAMOR-

PHOSIS, a poem. Price 25s. -'-

1)ANTHEONITES, a dramatic entertainment, as
. performed at, the Theatres Royal, London, with
universal applause. Price I.- . :

3
