- S

.

<^-czc ^ '
c^^ C^€^7Q^^^^y

7~~
-<'~7 € .-s^-

.7v
t~~t ?óóyer

DOUGLAS:

A
TRAGEDY.

As it is aed at the
TH EAT RE S-R O Y A L

I N

D R U R Y-L A N E,
COV E N T-GARDEN,

A N D
AND

E DI N B U'R G H.
Non ego fum vates, fed prifcius confcius z*n

A NEW EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for T. CASLON, T. LOWNDZS, W. NICOLL

and S. BLADON.

U DCC 1XXrI.

# PROLOGUE.

PROLO G U E.

Spoken by Mr. SPARKS.
IN antient times, when Britain's trade was arms,

dnd the lov'd mujic of her youth, alarms,

A god-like race futain'd fair England'sfame:

/ho has not heard of gallant PIERCY's name ?
Ay, and of DOUGLAS ? Such illuliriousfoes
In rivalRoME and Carthage never rose I
From age to age bright Jhone the Britiih fire,
And every hero was a hero's fire.
iYhen powerful Fate decreed one warrior's doom,
Upfprung the Phaenix from his parent's tomb.
But whil/l these generous rivalsfought and fell,
These generous rivals lov'd each other well:
lho' many a bloody field was lolt and won,
Nothing in hate, in honour all was done.
yhten PIERCY wrong'd defy'd his prince or peers
Fafl came the DOUGLAS, with his Scottih spears;
And, when proud DouGLAS made his King hisfoe,
For DOUGLAS, PIERCY bent his English bow.
Expell'd their native homes by adverfefate,
They knock'd alternate at eacb other's gate:

bhen

Then blaz'd the cafle, at the midnight hour,
For him whofr arms had hook itsfirmell tower.
Tnis night a DOUGLAS your protelion claims;
A wfe ! a mother ! pity's foftft names.
Thej.ory of her woes indulgent hear,
Andgrant your Suppliant all she begs, a tear.
In confidence, /he begs; and hopes to find
Each Englilh breafi, like noble PIERCY', kind.

DRAMATJ

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ, As represented originally at Edinburgh.

DRAMATIS PERSONE,

As represented originally at Edinburgh.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. YOUNGER.

GLENALVON, Mr. LoEx.

NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. DIGS.

STRANGER, Mr. HAYMAN.
SERVANTS, &C.

WOMEN.

MATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, r . WARD.
ANNA, Mrs. HOPKINS.

As represented a Editrurgb, 1768.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. KzENEPT.
GLENALVON, Mr. DAVIBS.
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. oss.
STRANGER, Mr. ADAMI.
SERVANTS, &C.

W M E .

MATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mr. BAKER.
ANNA, Mrs. SMITH.

At Covent-Garden, 1757.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. RIDOUT.
GLENALVON, Mr. SMITH.
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BARRY.
STRANGER, Mr. SPARKS.
SERVANTS, &C.

WOMEN.

MATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mrs. WOFFINGTON,
ANNA, Mrs. VINCENT.

At Drury-Lane, 1769.

Lord RANDOLPH, Mr. JEFFERSON.
GLENALVON, Mr. PALMER.
NORVAL, DOUGLAS, Mr. BRERETON.
STRANGER, Mr. PACKER.
SERVANTS, &C.

WOMEN.

MATILDA, Lady RANDOLPH, Mrs. BARRY.
ANNA, Mrs. REDDISH.

# ACT I. SCENE I.

k 1fó1 llbkm ' k

5:^ si
DOU GLAS:

A

TRAGEDY.

ACT I. SCENE I.
The court of a cajle, surrounded with woods.

a Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

E woods and wilds, whose melancholy gloom
Accords with my foul's sadness, and draws forth
The voice of sorrow from my bursting heart,
Farewell a while: I will not leave you long;

For in your shades I deem some spirit dwells,
Who from a chiding fiream, or groaning oak,
Still hears, and answers to MATILDA'S moan.
0 DOUGLAS DOUGLAS ! if departed ghosts

B Are

Are e'er permitted to review this world,
Within the circle of that wood thou art,
And with the pafion of immortals hear't
My lamentation: hear'st thy wretched wife
Weep for her husband slain, her infant loft.
My brother's timeless death I seem to mourn:
Who perifh'd with thee on this fatal day.
To thee I lift my voice; to thee address
The plaint which mortal ear has never heard.
O disregard me not; though I am call'd
Another's now, my heart is wholly thine.
Incapable of change, affection lies
Buried, my DOUGLAS, in thy bloody grave.
But RANDOLPH comes, whom fate has made my Lord,
To chide my anguifl, and defraud the dead.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Again these weeds of woe ! fay, do'st thou well
To feed a paflion which consumes thy life ?
The living claim some duty; vainly thou
Befow'ft thy cares upon the silent dead.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Silent, alas ! is he for whom I mourn:
Childless, without memorial of his name,
He only now in my remembrance lives.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Time, that wears out the trace of deepest anguiih,
Has pass o'cr thee in vain. Wou'd thou wer't not
Compos'd of grief and tenderness alone !
Sure thou art not the daughter of Sir MALCOLM:
Strong was his rage, eternal his resentment:
For when thy brother fell, he fmil'd to hear
That DOUGLAS' son in the fame field was slain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh ! rake not up the ashes of my fathers:
Implacable resentment was the crime,
And grievous has the expiation been.

Con-

Contending with the DOUGLAS, gallant lives
Of either house were loft; my ancestors
Compell'd, at last, to leave their ancient feat
On Tiviot's pleasant banks; and now, of them
No heir is left. Had they not been so tern,
I had not been the last of all my race.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy grief wrests to its purposes my words.
I never ask'd of thee that ardent love,
Which in the breafs of fancy's children burns.
Decent affecion, and complacent kindness
Were all I wish'd for; but I wish'd in vain.
Hence with the less regret my eyes beliold
The storm of war that gathers o'er this land:
If I hould peri/h by the Danish sword,
MATILDA would not shed one tear the more.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou do'st not think so . woeful as I am
I love thy merit, and esteem thy virtues.
But whither gceft thou now ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Straight to the camp,

Where every warrior on tip-toe fiands
Of expecation, and impatient asks
Each who arrives, if he is come to tell
The Danes are landed.

Lady RANDOLPH.

0, may adverse winds,

Far from the coast of Scotland drive their fleet !
And every soldier of both hosts return
In peace and safety to his pleasant home

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thou fpeak'ft a woman's, hear a warrior's wifl:
Right from their native land, the flormy north,
May the wind blow, till every keel is six'd

B 2 Ia-

Immoveable in Caledonia's firand !
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal shore.

Lady RANDOLPH.

War I detest: but war with foreign foes,
Whose manners, language, and whose looks are frange,
Is not so horrid, nor to me so hateful,
As that which with our neighbours oft we wage.
A river here, there an ideal line
By fancy drawn, divides the ifter kingdoms.
On each fide dwells a people similar,
As twins are to each other, valiant both,
Both for their valour famous thro' the world.
Yet will they not unite their kindred arms,
And, if they muff have war, wage distant war,
But with each other fight in cruel conflict.
Gallant in strife, and noble in their ire,
The battle is their pastime. They go forth
Gay in the morning, as to summer sport:
When ev'ning comes, the glory of the morn,
The youthful warrior, is a clod of clay.
Thus fall the prime of either hapless land;
And such the fruit of Scotch and English wars.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I'll hear no more: this melody would make
A soldier drop his sword, and doff his arms,
Sit down and weep the conquests he has made;
Yea, (like a monk) sing reft and peace in heav'n
To fouls of warriors in his battles slain.
Lady, farewell: I leave thee not alone;
Yonder comes one whose love makes duty light.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.

Forgive the rashness of your ANNA'S love:
Urg'd by affecion, I have thus prefum'd

To

To interrupt your solitary thoughts;
And warn you of the hours that you negle&,
And lose in sadness.

Lady RANDOLPH.

So to lose my hours
Is all the use I wish to make of time.

ANNA.

To blame thee, lady, suits not with my state:
But sure I am, since death first prey'd on man,
Never did sifter thus a brother mourn.
What had your sorrows been if you had loft,
In early youth, the husband of your heart ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
Oh!

ANNA.

Have I diftrefs'd you with officious love,
And ill-tim'd mention of your brother's fate ?
Forgive me, lady: humble tho' I am,
The mind I bear partakes not of my fortune:
So fervently I love you, that to dry
These piteous tears, I'd throw my life away.

Lady RANDOLPH.

What power directed thy unconscious tongue
To speak as thou haft done ? to name-

ANNA.

I know not:

But since my words have made my mistress tremble,
I will speak so no more ; but silent mix
My tears with hers.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No, thou halt not be silent.

I'll trufl thy faithful love, and thou halt be
Henceforth th' inftruaed partner of my woes.
But what avails it ? Can thy feeble pity
Roll back the flood of never.-bbing time ?

Com.

Compel the earth and ocean to give up
Their dead alive ?

ANNA.

What means my noble mifirefs ?
Lady RANDOLPH.

Didt'f thou not ask what had my sorrows been,-
It I in early youth had loft a husband ?
In the cold bosom of the earth is lodg'd,
Mangl'd with wounds, the husband of my youth
And in some cavern of the ocean lies
IVjy child and his.--

ANNA.

O ! lady, most rever'd !

The tale wrapt up in your amazing words
Deign to unfold.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas ! an ancient feud,

Hereditary evil, was the source
Of my misfortunes. Ruling fate decreed,
That my brave brother fliould in battle save
The life of DOUGLAS' son, our house's foe:
The youthful warriors vow'd eternal friendship.
To fee the vaunted fifler of his friend
Impatient, DOUGLAS to Balarmo came,
Under a borrow'd name.-My heart he gain'd;
Nor did I long refute the hand he begg'd:
My brother's presence authoriz'd our marriage.
Three weeks, three little weeks, with wings of down,
,Had o'er us flown, when my lov'd lord was call'd
To fight his father's battles ; and with him,
In spite of all my tears, did MALCOLM go.
Scarce were they gone, when my fern fire was told
That the false stranger was lord DOUGLAS' son.
Frantic with rage, the baron drew his sword
And qucftion'd me. Alone, forsaken, faint,
Kneeling beneath his sword, fault'ring I took

An

An oath equivocal, that I ne'er would
Wed one of DOUGLAS' name. Sincerity I
Thou first of virtues, let no mortal leave
Thy onward path ! altho' the earth hould gape,
And from the gulf of hell dftrution cry
To take diflimulation's winding way.

ANNA.

Alas ! how few of woman's fearful kind
Durst own a truth o hardy !

Lady RANDOLPH.

The first truth

Is easiest to avow. This moral learn,
This precious moral, from my tragic tale.-
In a few days the dreadful tidings came
That DOUGLAS and my brother both were slain.
My lord ! my life! my husband ! - mighty God !
What had I done to merit such affli&ion ?

ANNA.

My dearest lady ! many a tale of tears
I've listen'd to; but never did I hear
A tale so fad as this.

Lady RANDOLPH.

In the first days

Of my diftracing grief, I found myself--
As women wish to be who love their lords.
But who durit tell my father ? The good priest
Who join'd our hands, my brother's antient tutor,
With his lov'd MALCOLM, in the battle fell:
They two alone were privy to the marriage.
On silence and concealment I refolv'd,
Till time should make my father's fortune mine.
That very night on which my son was born,
My nurse, the only confidant I had,
Set out with me to reach her fllter's house:
But nurse, nor infant, have I ever seen,
Or heard of ANNA, since that fatal hour.
My imurder'd child ! - had thy fond mother fcar'd

The

The loss of thee, he had loud fame defy'd,
Defpis'd her father's rage, her father's grief,
And wander'd with thee thro' the scorning world.

ANNA.
Not fern, nor heard of ! then perhaps he lives.

Lady RANDOLPH.

No. It was dark December: wind and rain
Had beat all night. Across the Carron lay
The defiin'd road; and in its swelling flood
My faithful servant perifh'd with my child.
0 hapless on ! of a most hapless fire I -
But they are both at reft: and I alone
Dwell in this world of woe, condemn'd to walk,
Like a guilt-troubl'd ghost, my painful rounds:
Nor has despiteful fate permitted me
The comfort of a solitary sorrow.
Tho' dead to love, I was compell'd to wed
RANDOLPH, who fnatch'd me from a villain's arms;
And RANDOLPH now poffefles the domains,
That by Sir MALCOLM'S death on me devolv'd;
Domains, that hould to DOUGLAS' son have giv'n
A baron's title, and a baron's power.
Such were my oothing thoughts, while I bewail'd
The flaughter'd father of a son unborn.
And when that on came, like a ray from heaven,
Which hincs and disappears; alas ! my child I
How long did thy fond mother grasp the hope
Of having thee, she knew not how, reftor'd.
Year after year hath worn her hope away
But left still undiminifh'd her desire.

ANNA.

The hand, that spins th' uneven thread of life,
May smooth the length that's yet to come of your's.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Not in this world: I have confider'd well
Its various evils, and on whom they fall.

Alas

Alas ! how oft does goodness wound itself?
And sweet affetion prove the spring of woe.
O ! had I died when my lov'd husband fell!
Had some good angel op'd to me the book
Of providence, and let me read my life,
My heart had broke, when I beheld the fum
Of ills, which one by one I have endur'd.

ANNA.

That God, whose ministers good angels are,
Hath lhut the book in mercy to mankind.
But we must leave this theme: GLENALVON comes:
I saw him bend on you his thoughtful eyes,
And hitherwards he slowly flalks his way.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will avoid him. An ungracious pcrfon
Is doubly irksome in an hour like this.

ANNA.
Why speaks my lady thus of RANDOLPH'S heir.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Because he's not the heir of RAN DOLPH's virtues.
Subtle and hrew'd, he offers to mankind
An artificial image of himself:
And he with ease can vary to the tate
Of different men, its features. Self-denied,
And mailer of his appetites he seems:
But his fierce nature, like a fox chain'd up,
Watches to seize unih the wilh'd-for prey.
Never were vice and virtue pois'd so ill.
As in GLENALVON'S unrelenting mind.
Yet is he brave and politic in war,
And ilands aloft in these unruly times.
Why I describe him thus I'll tell hereafter:
Stay, and detain him till I reach the caflle.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.
C ANNA.

ANNA.

0 happincfs ! hcre art thou to be found ?
I fee thou dwelledl not with birth and beauty,
Tho' grac'd with grandeur and in wealth array'd:
Nor doll thou, it would seem, with virtue dwell;
Else had this gentle lady mifs'd thee not.

Entcr GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

What dolt thou muse on, meditating maid ?
Like some entranc'd and visionary seer,
On earth thou ftand'ft, thy thoughts ascend to heaven,

ANNA.

Wou'd that I were, e'en as thou fay'ft, a seer,
To have my doubts by heavenly vision clear'd !

GLENALVON.

What doll thou doubt of? what haft thou to do
With fubjcas i tricate ? Thy youth, thy beauty.
Cannot be qucllioned : think oftnefe good gifts;
And then thy contemplations will be pleasing.

ANNA.

Let women view yon monument of woe,
Then boast of beauty : who so fair as he
But I mull follow : this revolving day
Awakcs the memory of her antient woes.

[Exit ANNA.

GLENALVON fltuS.

So!-Lady RANDOLPII shuns me; by and by
1'1l woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
The deed's a doing now, that makes me lord
Of thefc rich valleys, and a chief of power.
The season is molt apt; my founding fleps
Will not be heard amidlt the din of arms.

RAN-

RANDOLPH has liv'd too long: his better fate
Had the ascendant once, and kept me down:
When I had seiz'd the dame, by chance he came,
Refcu'd and had the lady for his labour;
I 'cap'd unknown: a slender consolation!
Heav'n is my witness that I do not love
To sow in peril, and let others reap
The jocund harvest. Yet I am not safe:
By love or something like it, flung, inflam'd,
Madly I blabb'd my passion to his wife,
And he has threatn'd to acquaint him of it.
The way of woman's will I do not know:
But well I know the baron's wrath is deadly.
I will not live in fear: the man I dread
Is as a Dane to me; ay, and the man
Who stands betwixt me and my chief desire.
No bar but he; she has no kinsman near;
No brother in his fiter's quarrel bold;
And for the righteous cause, a stranger's cause,
I know no chief that will defy GLENALVOn.

End of t t FRs T A C T,

C2 ACT

# ACT II. SCENE I.

ACT II. SCENE I.

_. Ccurt, &c.
Eti, /;rVi-ns and ajitranger at one door, and Lady RAN-

DOLPH and ANNA at another.

Lady RANDOLPH.
W VHIIAT means this clamour ? firanger, speak secure;

Haft thou been wrong'd ? have there rude men
To vex the weary traveller on his way ? [prefum'd

First SERVANT.

Iy us no fIranger ever suffered wrong:
This man with outcry wild has call'd us forth;
So fore afraid he cannot speak his fears.
lEntir Lo d R.ANDCLPH ad a youtn man, with tl.eirfwords

I atLi n ald bloody.

Iady RANDOLPH.
Not vaiin the llranger's fears! how fares my lord ?

Loid RANDOLPH.
That it fires well, thanks to this gallant youth,

ife valour fav'd me from a wretched death !

As down the winding dale I walk'd alone,
At the crols way fur armed men attack'd me:
Rovers, I judge, from the licentious camp,
V ho would have quickly laid Lord RANDOLPM low,
IHiil not this brave and generous stranger come,

Like

Like my good angel in the hour of fate,
And, mocking danger, made my foes his own.
They turn'd upon him: but his aive arm
Struck to the ground, from whence they role no more,
The fiercell two; the others fled amain,
And left him maiter of the bloody field.
Speak, Lady RANDOLPH : upon Beauty's tongue
Dwell accents pleasing to the brave and bold.
Speak, noble dame, and thank him for thy lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My lord, I cannot speak what now I feel.
My heart o'erflows with gratitude to heav'n,
And to this noble youth, who all unknown
To you and yours, deliberated not,
Nor paus'd at peril, but humanely brave
Fought on your fide, againll such fearful odds,
Have you not learn'd of him whom we hould thank ?
Whom call the saviour of Lord R A N D O LPH 'S life?

Lord RANDOLPH.

I ak'd that question, and he anfwor'd not:
But I mutl know who my deliverer is. ('To the Stranger.)

STRANGER.

A low born man, of parentage obscure,
Who nought can boas but his desire to be
A soldier, and to gain a name in arms.

LORD RANDOLPH.

Whoe'er thou art, thy spirit is ennobled
By the great King of Kings! thou art ordain'd
And ftampt a hero by the sovereign hand
Of nature ! bluih not, flower of modefly
As well as valour , to declare thy birth.

STRANGER.

My Name is NORVAL : on the Grampion hills
My father feeds his flocks ; a frugal wain,
Whose constant cares were to increase his flore,

C 3 And

And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I long'd
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heav'n soon granted what my fire denied.
This moon which rose last night, round as my shield,
Had not yet fill'd her horns, when, by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians from the hills,
Rufh'd like a torrent down upon the vale,
Sweeping our ocks and herds. The hepherds fled
For safety, and for succour. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hover'd about the enemy, and mark'd
The road he took, then hailed to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
'Till we o'ertook the fpoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought and conquer'd. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierc'd their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I difdain'd
The shepherd's slothful life; and having heard
That our good king had fummon'd his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron fide,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my steps:-
Yon trembling coward who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I past there towers,
And, hcaven-dirclcd, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.

LORD RANDCLPH.

He i s as ife as brave. M'as ever tale
With such a gllant modclly rehears'd ?
My brave deliverer ! thou lhalt enter now
A nobler lift, and in a monarch's fight
Contend with princes for the prize of fame,

I will

I will prerent thee to our Scottifl king,
Whose valiant spirit ever valour Iov'd.
Ha ! my MATILDA ! wherefore itarts that tear ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

I cannot fay: for various aflteions,
And irangely mingled, in my bosom swell;
Yet each of them may well command a tear.
I joy that thou art safe; and admire
Him and his fortunes who hath wrought thy safety.
Obscure and friendless, he the army fought,
Bent upon peril, in the range of death
Refolv'd to hunt for fame, and with his sword
To gain diftinaion which his birth denied.
In this attempt unknown he might have periih'd,
And gain'd with all his valour, but oblivion.
Now grac'd by thee, his virtue serves no more
Beneath despair. The soldier now of hope
He lands conspicuous; fame and great renown
Are brought within the compass of his sword.
On this my mind reflected, whilst you spoke,
And blefs'd the wonder-working Lord of heaven.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Pious and greatful ever are thy thoughts !
My deeds hall follow where thou point'fl the way.
Next to myself, and equal to GLENALVON,
In honour and command (hall NORVAL be.

NORVAL.

I know not how to thank you. Rude I am,
In speech and manners: never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my lord,
There's omething in my breaf which makes me bold
To fay that NORVAL ne'er will tiame thy favour.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I will be sworn thou wilt not. Thou (halt be

C + My

# SCENE II.

My knight; and ever, as thou dost to-day,
With happy valour guard the life of RANIDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Well haft thou spoke. Let me forbid reply. [To NORVAL.
We are thy debtors till; thy high desert
O'ertops our gratitude. I mull proceed,
As was at first intended, to the camp.
Some of my train I fee are speeding hither,
Impatient, doubtless, of their lord's delay.
Go with me, NORVAL, and thine eyes shall fee
The chosen warriors of thy native land,
Who languish for the fight, and beat the air,
With brandifh'd swords.

NORVAL.
Let us be gone, my lord.
Lord RANDOLPH.

[To Lady RANDOLPH.

About the time that the declining fun
Shall his broad orbit o'er yon hills suspend,
Expec us to return. This night once more
Within these walls I reft; my tent I pitch
To-morrow in the field. Prepare the feaR.
Free is his heart who for his country fights:
He in the eve of battle may resign
Himself to social pleasure; sweeted then,
When danger to a soldier's foul endears
The human joy that never may return.

[Exit RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

SCENE II.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

His parting words have ruck a fatal truth.
0 DOUGLAS ! DouLAS ! tender was the time

Whet

When we two parted, ne'er to meet again !
How many years of anguish and despair
Has heaven annex'd to those swift pasing hours
Of love and fondness! Then my bosom's flame
Oft, as blown back by the rude breath of fear,
Returned, and with redoubled ardoar blaz'd.

ANNA.

May gracious heav'n pour the sweet balm of peace
Into the wounds that fetler in your bread !
For earthly consolation cannot cure them.

Lady RANDOLPH.

One only cure can heav'n itself bellow ;-
A grave-that Bed in which the weary ret.
Wretch that I am ! Alas I why am I o ?
At every happy parent I repine !
How blet the mother of yon gallant NORVAL !
She for a living hulband bore her pains,
And heard him bless her when a man was born:
She nurs'd her smiling infant on her breadt;
Tended the child, and rear'd the pleasing boy
She, with affetion's triumph, saw the youth
In grace and comeliness furpais his peers:
Whilf I to a dead hulband bore a son,
And to the roaring waters gave my child.

ANNA.

Alas ! alas ! why will you thus resume
Your grief afrelh ? I thought that gallant youth
Would for a while have won you from your woe.
On him intent you gazed, with a look
Much more delighted, than your pensive eye
Has deign'd on other objects to bellow.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Delighted fay'ft thou ? Oh ! even there mine eye

Found

Found fuel for nty life.confuming sorrow;
I thought, that had the son of Do G L A liv'd,
He might have been like this young gallant itranger,
And pair'd with him in features and in hape,
In all endowments, as in years, 1 deem,
My boy with blooming NORVAL might have number'd.
Whilfi thus I mus'd, a spark from fancy fell
On my fad heart, and kindled up a fondness
For this young tranger wandring from his home,
And like an orphan call upon my care.
I will protect thee, (said I to myself)
With all my power, and grace with all my favour.

ANNA.

Sure heav'n will bless so gen'rous a resolve.
You mull, my noble dame, exert your power:
You mull awake : devices will be fram'd,
And arrows pointed at the brealt of NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

GLEN ALVON'S falf and crafty head will work
Against a rival in his kinsman's love,
If I deter him not: Ionly can.
Bold as he is, GLENALVON will beware
I-ow he pulls down the fabric that I raise.
I'll be the artist of young NoRV AL'S fortune.
'Tis pleating to admire ! moll apt was I
To this affecion in my better days;
Though now I seem to you hrunk up, retired
Within the narrow compass of my woe.
Have you not fometimcs seen an early flower
Open it's bud, and spread it's silken leaves,
To catch sweet airs, and odours to bellow;
Then, by the keen blast nipt, pull in it's leaves,
And, tho' flill living, die to scent and beauty e

Em-

Emblem of me: affliftion, like a Rform,
Hath kill'd the forward blossom of my heart.

Ester GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.
Where is my dearest kinsman, noble RANDOLPH

Lady RANDOLPH.
Have you not heard, GLENALVON, of the bare-

GLENALVON.

I have: and that the villains may not 'scape,
With a strong band I have begirt the wood.
If they lurk there, alive they shall be taken,
And torture force from them th' important secret,
Whether some foe of RANDOLPH hir'd their swords,
Or if-

Lady RANDOLPH.

That care becomes a kinsman's love.
I have a counsel for GLENALVON'S ear. [Exit ANNA.

GLENALVON.
To him your counsels always are commands.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I have not found so: thou art known to me,

GLENALVON.
Known!

Lady RANDOLPH.
And molf certain is my cause of knowledge.

GLENALLON.

What do you know ? By the most blessed cross,
You much amaze me. No created thing,
Yourself except, durst thus accost GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Is guilt so bold ? and dolt thou make a merit
Of thy pretended meekne(s ? This to me,
Who, with a gentleness which duty blames,
Have hitherto conccal'd what, if divulg'd,
Would make thee nothing ; or, what's worse than that,

An

An outcast beggar, and unpitied too:
For mortals fludder at a crime like thine.

GLENALVON.

Thy virtue awes me. First of womankind !
Permit me yet to fay, that the fond man
Whom love transports beyond frit virtue's bounds,
If he is brought by love to misery,
In fortune ruin'd, as in mind forlorn,
Unpitied cannot be. Pity's the alms
Which on such beggars freely is bellowed:
For mortals know that love is fill their lord,
And o'er their vain resolves advances fill:
As fire, when kindled by our shepherds, moves
Thro' the dry heath before the fanning wind.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Reserve these accents for some other ear.
To love's apology I liften not.
Mark thou my words; for it is meet thou Ihould'ft.
His brave deliverer RAN DOLl H here retains.
Perhaps his presence may not please thee well:
But, at my peril, pratife ought against him:
Let not thy jealousy attempt to lhake
And loosen the good root he has in RANDOLPH;
Whose favourites I know thou haft supplanted.
Thou look's at me as if thou fain would'st pry
Into my heart. 'Tis open as my speech.
I give this early caution, and put on
The curb, before thy temper breaks away.
The friendless stranger my proteion claims:
His friend I am, and be not thou his foe. [Exit.

SCENE

# SCENE III.

S C E N E III.

Manet GLEALVON.

Child that I was, to fart at my own hadow,
And be it the ihallow fool of coward conscience !
I am not what I have been ; what I hould be.
The darts of detliny have almost pierc'd
My marble heart. Had I one grain of faith
In holy legends, and religious tales,
I should conclude there was an arm above
That fought againfi me, and malignant turn'd,
To catch myself, the subtle snare I set.
Why, rape and murder are not simple means !
Th' imperfec rape to RANDOLPH gavea spouse
And the intended murder introduc'd
A favourite to hide the fun from me;
And worf of all, a rival. Burning hell!
This were thy center, if I thought fle loved him!
'Tis certain he contemns me; nay commands me,
And waves the flag of her displeasure o'er me,
In his behalf. And (hall I thus be brav'd
Curb'd, as he calls it, by dame chastity ?
Infernal fiends, if any fiends there are
More fierce than love, ambition, and revenge,
Rife up and fill my bosom with your fires
And policy remorfclefs Chance may spoil
A tingle aim; but perseverance mul
Prosper at laR. For chance and fate are words:
Perfillive wildom is the fate of man.
Darkly a project peers upon my mind,
Like the red moon when rising in the east,

Crofs'd

Crofs'd and divided by itrange-colour'd clouds.
I'll seek the save who came with NORVAL hither,
And for his cowardice was spurned from him.
I've known such followers rankled bosom breed
Venom molR fatal to his heedless lord. [Exit.

End of the SECOND ACT.

ACT

# ACT III. SCENE I.

ACT III. SCENE I.

A Court, &c. as before.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.

H Y vassals, Grief! great nature's order break,
And change the noon-tide to the midnight hour.

Whilst Lady RANDOLPH sleeps, I will walk forth,
And taste the air that breathes on yonder bank.
Sweet may her slumbers be ! Ye ministers
Of gracious heaven who love the human race,
Angels and seraphs who delight in goodness !
Forsake your kies, and to her couch descend !
There from her fancy chafe those dismal forms
That haunt her waking; her fad spirit charm
With images celestial, such as please
The blest above upon their golden beds.

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.

One of the vile aafins is fecur'd.
We found the villain lurking in the wood:
With dreadful imprecations he denies
All knowledge of the crime. But this is not
lHis first eay : these jewels were conceal'd
In the most secret places of his garment;
Belike the spoils of ome that he has murder'd.

ANNA.

Let me look on them. Ha! here is a heart,
The chosen crelt of DocGLAS' valiant name !

These

# SCENE II.

These are no vulgar jewels. Guard the wretch.

Exit A N , .
Enter Servants with a pri/oncr.

PRISONER.

I know no more than does the child unborn
Of what you charge me with.

Firif SERVANT.

You fay so, fir

But torture soon hall make you peak the truth.
Behold the Lady of Lord RA DOLPH comes:
Prepare yourself to meet her just revenge.

SCENE II.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

ANNA.

Summon your utmost fortitude, before
Youn peak with him. Your dignity, your fame,
Are now at flake. Think of the fatal secret,
Which in a moment from your lips may fly.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou (halt behold me, with a desperate heart,
Hear how my infant perifh'd. See he kneels.

[The pri-Jntr nrlh.

PRISONER.

Heav'n bless that countenance o sweet and mild !
A judge like thee makes innocence more bold.
O save me Lady ! from there cruel men,
Who have attack'd and seiz'd me; who accuse
Me of intended murder. As I hope
For mercy at the judgment feat of God,
The tender lamb, that never nipt the grass,
Is not more innocent than I of murder.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.
Of this man's guilt what proof can ye produce?

First SERVANT.

We found him lurking in the hollow lynn.
When view'd and call'd upon, amaz'd he fled.
We overtook him, and enquir'd from whence
And what he was: he said he came from far,
And was upon his journey to the camp.
Not satisfied with this we searched his cloaths,
And found there jewels; whose rich value plead
AMoft powerfully againt him. Hard he seems
And old in villainy. Permit us to try
His stubbornness against the torture's force.

PRISONER.

O gentle lady ! by your lord's dear life !
Which these weak hands, I swear, did ne'er assail
And by your childrens welfare, spare my age !
Let not the iron tear my ancient joints,
And my grey hairs bring to the grave with pain.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Account for these: thine own they cannot be:
For these, I fay: be stedfast to the truth;
Detected falfhood is most certain death.

[ANNA removes the ervants and returns

PRISONER.

Alas ! I'm fore beset ! let never man,
For fake of lucre, fin against his foul !
Eternal justice is in this most jut !
I, guiltless now, must former guilt reveal.

Lady RANDOLPH.

O ! ANNA hear !-once more I charge thee speak
The truth dire&: for there to me foretell
And certify a part of thy narration;
With which if the remainder tallies not,
An instant and a dreadful death abides thee.

D PRI-

PRISONER.

Then, thus adjur'd, I'll speak to you as just
As if you were the minister of heaven,
Sent down to search the secret fins of men.

Some eighteen years ago, I rented land,

Of lirave Sir MIALCOLM, then BALARMO'S lord;
But flli to decay, h:s Icrvants seiz'd
All that I had, and then turned me and mine,
( Four hclplcfs infants and their weeping mother)
Out to the mercy of the winter winds.
A little hovel by the river's fide
Received us: there hard labour, and the frill
In fifliing, which was formerly my sport,
Supported life. WXhill thus we poorly liv'd,
One flormy night, as I remember well,
The wind and rain beat hard upon our roof:
Red came the river down, and loud and oft
The angry spirit of the water fhriek'd.
At the dead hour of night was heard the cry
Of one in jeopardy. 1 rose, and ran
To where the circling eddy of a pool,
Beneath the ford, us'd oft to bring within
My reach whatev-r floating thing the stream
Had caught. The voice was ceas'd; the person loft:
But looking Iad and earnest on the waters,
By the moon's light I saw, whirl'd round and round,
A basket: soon I drew it to the bank,
And nclled curious there an infant lay.

Lady RANDOLPH.
\Was he alive ?

PRISONER.

He was.
Lady RANDOLPH. '

Inhuman that thou art!
How coulda thou kill what waves and tempefis spared

PRISONER.
I am not so inhuman.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Didft thou not ?

ANNA.

My noble mistress, you are mov'd too much:
This man has not the aspec of flern murder;
Let him go on, and you I hope will hear
Good tidings of your kinsman's long loft child.

PRISONER.

The needy man, who has known better days,
One whom distress has spited at the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
To do such deeds, as makes the prosperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them,
And such a man was I; a man declin'd,
Who saw no end of black adversity:
Yet, for the wealth of kingdoms, I would not
Have touched that infant with a hand of harm.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Ha ! dost thou fay so; Then perhaps he lives !

PRISONER. ,
Not many days ago he was alive.

LADY RANDOLPH.
0 ! God of heav'n ! Did he then die so lately ?

PRISONER.

I did not fay he died; I hope he lives.
Not many days ago these eyes beheld
Him, flourishing in youth, and health, and beauty.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Where is he now ?

PRISONER.

Alas I I know not where.
D 2 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Oh fate ! I fear thee still. Thou riddler, speak
Dired and clear; else I will search thy foul.

ANNA.

Permit me, ever honour'd ! Keen impatience,
Tho' hard to be rcfirain'd, defeats itself.-
Purfuc thy flory with a faithful tongue,
To the last hour that thou didft keep the child.

PRISONER.

Fear not my faith, tho' I mulf speak my shame.
Within the cradle where the infant lay,
Was itow'd a mighty flore of gold and jewels;
Tempted by which we did resolve to hide,
From all the world, this wonderful event,
And like a peasant breed the noble child.
That none might mark the change of our estate,
We left the country, travell'd to the north,
Bought flocks and herds, and gradually brought forth
Our secret wealth. But God's all-feeing eye
Beheld our avarice, and mote us fore.
For one by one all our own children died,
And he the stranger, sole remain'd the heir
Of what indeed was his. Fain then would I,
Who with a father's fondness lov'd the boy,
Have trufled him, now in the dawn of youth,
With his own secret: but my anxious wife,
Forboding evil, never would consent.
Mean while the firipling grew in years and beauty;
And, as we oft ohferved, he bore himself,
Not as the offspring of our cottage blood;
For nature will break out: mild with the mild,
But with the froward he was fierce as fire,
And night and day he talk'd of war and arms.
I et myself against his warlike bent;
But all in vain : for when a desperate band
Of robbers from the savage mountains came--

Lady

Lady KANDOLPH.
Eternal Providence ! What is thy name ?

PRISONER.
My name is NORVAL; and my name he bears.

Lady RANDOLPH.

*Tis he; 'tis he himself ! It is my son !
O overeign mercy ! 'Twas my child I saw !
No wonder, ANNA, that my bosom burn'd.

ANNA.

Just are your transports : ne'er was woman's heart
Prov'd with such fierce extremes. High fated dame
But yet remember that you are beheld
By servile eyes; your gestures may be seen
Impaflion'd, strange; perhaps your words o'erheard.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Well dost thou counsel, ANNA: Heav'n bestow
On me that wisdom which my state requires !

ANNA.

The moments of deliberation pass,
And soon you must resolve. This useful man
Must be dismissed with safety, ere my lord
Shall with his brave deliverer return.

PRISONER.

If I, amidst aftoni{hment and fear,
Have of your words and gestures rightly judg'd,
Thou art the daughter of my ancient master
The child I refcu'd from the flood is thine.

Lady RANDOLPH.

With thee diflimulation now were vain.
I am indeed the daughter of Sir MALCOLM;
The child thou refcu'dft from the flood is mine.

PRISONER.

Blest be the hour that made me a poor man I
My poverty hath fav'd my mater's house !

D 3 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy words furprize me: sure thou dost not feign:
The tear flands in thine eye: such love from thee
Sir MALCOLM'S house defcrv'd not; if aright
Thou told'ft the flory of thy own distress.

PRISONER.

Sir i\lALCOLM of our barons was the flower;
Tho' fastest friend, the best and kindelt malter.
But ah ! he knew not of my fad eate.
After the battle, where his gallant son,
Your own brave brother, fell, the good old lord
Grew defpcrate and reckless of the world;
And never, as he erit was wont, went forth
To overlook the conduct of his servants.
By them I was thrust out, and them I blame:
May heav'n o judge me as I judg'd my mailer !
And God so love me as I love his race !

Lady RANDOLPH.

His race hall yet reward thee. On thy faith
Depends the fate of thy lov'd mailer's house.
Rememb'reft thou a little lonely hut,
That like a holy hermitage appears
Among the clifts of Carron ?

PRISONER.
I remember
The cottage of the clifts.

Lady RANDOLPH.

'Tis that I mean:

There dwells a man of venerable age,
Who in my father's service spent his youth:
Tell him I sent thee, and with him remain,
'Till I shall call upon thee to declare,
Before the king and nobles, what thou now

To

# SCENE III.

To me haft told. No more but this, and thou
Shalt live in honour all thy future days;
Thy son so long (hall call thee father still,
And all the land shall bless the man, who fav'd
The son of DOUGLAS, and Sir MALCOLM'S heir.
Remember well my words: if thou hotlldtl meet
Him whom thou call'tt thy on, tfill call him o ;
And mention nothing of his noble father.

PR IsONER.

Fear not that I fiall mar so fair an harvet,
By putting in my fickle ere'tis ripe.
Why did 1 leave my home and ancient dame ?
To find the youth, to tell him all I knew,
And make him wear these jewels in his arms;
Which might, I thought, be challeng'd, and so bring
To light the fccret of his noble birth.

[Lady RANDOLPH goes towards the frvants.

Lady RANDOLPH.

This man is not th' assassin you fufpeaed,
Tho' chance combin'd ome likelihoods against him.
He is the faithful bearer of the jewels
To their right owner, whom in hafe he seeks.
'Tis meet that you should put him on his way,
Since your mistaken zeal hath dragg'd him hither.

[Exeunt Stranger and Servants.

SCENE Ill.
Lady RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lady RANDOLPH.

My faithful ANNA ! dost thou (hare my joy ?
I know thou dost. Unparallel'd event !
Reaching from heav'n to earth, Jehovah's arm
Snatch'd from the waves, and brings to me my son
Judge of the widow, and the orphan's father!

D 4 Accept

Accept a widow's and a mother's thanks
For such a gift ! What does my ANNA think
Of the young eaglet of a valiant nest ?
How oon he gaz'd on bright and burning arms,
Spurn'd the low dunghill where his fate had thrown him,
And tower'd up to the region of his fire ?

ANNA.

How fondly did your eyes devour the boy !
Mysterious nature, with the unseen cord
Of powerful inftin&, drew you to your own.

Lady RANDOLPH.

The ready ltory of his birth believ'd
Supprefl my fancy quite; nor did he owe
To any likeness my o sudden favour:
But now I long to fee his face again,
Examine every feature, and find out
The lineaments of DOUGLAS, or my own.
But most of all, I long to let him know
Who his true parents are, to clasp his neck,
And tell him all the story of his father.

ANNA.

With wary caution you must bear yourself
In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And in ofervcrs stir conjectures strange.
For, if a cherub in the flape of woman
Should walk this world, yet defamation would,
Like a vile cur, bark at the angel's train-
To-day the baron Pfarted at your tears.

Lady RANDOLPH.

He did To ANNA ! well thy miflrefs knows,
If the least circumifance, mote of offence,
Should touch the baron's eye, his fight would ha
With jealousy diforder'd. But the more
It, does behove me instant to declare
The birth of DOUGLAS, andafert his rights,

This

This night I purpose with my son to meet,
Reveal the secret and consult with him:
For wife he is, or my fond judgment errs.
As he does now, so look'd his noble father,
Array'd in nature's ease : his mien, his speech,
Were weetly simple, and full oft deceiv'd
Those trivial mortals who seem always wife.
But, when the matter match'd his mighty mind,
Up rose the Hero: on his piercing eye
Sat Observation; on each glance of thought
Decision follow'd, as the thunder-bolt
Pursues the flash.

ANNA.

That demon haunts you still:
Behold GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Now I hun him not.

This day I brav'd him in behalf of NORVAL:
Perhaps too far: at least my'nicer fears
For DOUGLAS thus interpret.

Enter GLENALVON.

GLENALVON.

Noble Dame!

The hov'ring Dane at last his men hath landed;
No band of pirates; but a mighty host,
That come to fettle where their valour conquers:
To win a country, or to lose themfelvcs.

Lady RANDOLPH.
But whence comes this intelligence, GLENALVON I

GLENALVON.

A nimble courier ent from yonder camp,
To haften up the chieftains of the north,
Inform'd me, as he pass'd, that the fierce Dane
Had on the Eastern coast of Lothian landed,

Nar

Near to that place where the fea-rock immenfc,
Amazing Bass, looks o'er a fertile land.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Then must this western army march o join,
The warlike troops that guard Edcia'~ tow',s.

GLENALVON.

Beyond all qucltion. If impairing time
Has not effac'd the image of a place,
Once perfect in my breast, there is a wild
Which lies to westward of that mighty rock,
And seems by nature formed for the camp
Of water-wafted armies, whose chief frength
Lies in firm foot, unflank'd with warlike horse:
If martial kill direts the Danish lords,
There inaccessible their army lies
To our fwift-fcowring horse, the bloody field
Mufl man to man, and foot to foot, be fought.

Lady RANDOLPH.

How many mothers llall bewail their sons !
How many widows weep their husband's slain !
Ye dames of Denmark ! ev'n for you I feel,
Who, sadly fitting on the fea-beat shore,
Long look for lords that never flall return.

GLENALVON.

Oft has th' unconquer'd Caledonian sword
Widow'd the north. The children of the slain
Come, as I hope, to meet their fathers' fate.
The monttcr war, with her infernal brood,
Loud yelling fury, and life-ending pain,
Are objecs suited to GLENALVON'S foul.
Scorn is more grievous than the pains of death;
Reproach, more piercing than the pointed sword.

Lady RANDOLPH.
I scorn thee not, but when I ought to scorn;

Nor

Nor e'er reproach, but when insulted virtue
AgainfR audacious vice aferts herself.
I own thy worth, GLENALVON; none more apt
Than I to praise thine eminence in arms,
And be the echo of thy martial fame.
No longer vainly feed a guilty passion:
Go and pursue a lawful mistress, Glory.
Upon the Danilh cress redeem thy fault,
And let thy valour be the shield of RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON.

One instant flay, and hear an alter'd man.
When beauty pleads for virtue, vice abafh'd
Flies its own colours, and goes o'er to virtue.
I am your convert; time will hew how truly;
Yet one immediate proof I mean to give.
That youth for whom your ardent zeal to-day,
Somewhat too haughtily, defy'd your slave,
Amidit the shock of armies I'll defend,
And turn death from him, with a guardian arm,
Sedate by use, my bosom maddens not
At the tumultuous uproar of the field.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Ad thus, GLENALVON, and I am thy friend:
But that's thy least reward. Believe me, Sir,
The truly generous is the truly wife;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON J//ls.

Amen ! and virtue is its own reward !
I think that I have hit the very tone
In which she loves to speak. Honcy'd afent,
How pleating art thou to the tafle of man,
And woman also ! flattery dire&
Rarely disgusts. They little know mankind
Who doubt its operation: 'tis my key,

And

And opes the wicket of the human heart.
How far I have succeeded now, I know not.
Yet I incline to think her stormy virtue
Is lull'd awhile: 'tis her alone I fear:
Whilst he and RANDOLPH live, and live in faith
And amity, uncertain is my tenure.
Fate o'er my head ufpends disgrace and death,
By that weak air, a peevish female's will.
I am not idle: but the ebbs and flows
Of fortune's tide cannot be calculated.
That slave of NORVAL'S I have found moif apt:
I shew'd him gold, and he has pawn'd his foul
To fay and swear whatever I suggest.
NORVAL, I'm told, has that alluring look,
'Twixt man and woman, which I have obferv'd
To charm the nicer and fantastic dames,
Who are, like lady RANDOLPH, full of virtue.
In raising RANDOLPH'S jealousy I may
But point him to the truth. He seldom errs
Who thinks the worst he can of womankind.

-ht End of the THIRD ACT.

ACT

# ACT IV. SCENE I.

uek rd thk_»W G Lk*4h-W W-d

ACT IV. SCENE I.

Flourib of Trumpets.
Enter Lord RANDOLPH attended.

Lord RANDOLPH.
SUmmon an hundred horse, by break of day,

To wait our pleasure at the castle gate.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Alas ! my Lord I've heard unwelcome news;
The Danes are landed.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Ay, no inroad this

Of the Northumbrian bent to take a poil:
No sportive war, no tournament cfay,
Of some young knight resolved to break a spear,
And stain with hostile blood his maiden arms.
The Danes are landed: we must beat them back,
Or live the saves of Denmark.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Dreadful times !

Lord RANDOLPH.

The fenceless villages are all forsaken;
The trembling mothers, and their children lodg'd
In well-girt towers and castles; whilst the men

Retire

Retire indignant. Yet like broken waves,
They but retire more awful to return.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Immense, as fame reports, the Danifl host !

Lord RANDOLPH.

Were it as numerous as loud fame reports,
An army knit like ours would pierce it thro':
Brothers, that hrink not from each other's fide,
And fond companions, fill our warlike files:
For his dear offspring, and the wife he loves,
The husband, and the fearless father arm.
In vulgar breaffs heroic ardour burns,
And the poor pcafant mates his daring lord.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Men's minds are temper'd, like their swords, for war
Lovers of danger, on deftrution's brink
They joy to rear creet their daring forms.
Hence, early graves; hence the lone widow's life;
And the fad mother's grief-embitter'd age.
Where is our gallant gue ?

Lord RANDOLPH.

Down in the vale

I left him, managing a fiery steed,
Whose stubbornness had foil'd the strength and kill
Of every rider. But behold he comes,
In earneff conversation with GLENALVON.

]'ntr NoRVAL and GLENALVON.

GLENALVON! with the lark arise; go forth,
And leadl my troops that lye in yonder vale:
Private I travel to the royal camp:
NoRVAL, thou goes with me. But fay, young man
Whlere didft thou learn Co to discourse of war,
And in such terms, as I o'crhcard to-day?
WSar is no village science, nor its phrase

A lan-

A language taught amongst the hepherd swains.

NORVAL.

Small is the (kill my lord delights to praise
In him he favours.-Hear from whence it came.
Beneath a mountain's brow, the moRt remote
And inaccefible by hepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit liv'd; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wand'ring wains,
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the hepherds' alms.
I went to fee him, and my heart was touch'd
With reverence and pity. Mild he spake,
And, entring on discourse, such stories told
As made me oft revisit his fad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold GODFREDO led,
Against th' usurping Infidel difplay'd
The cross of Christ, and won the Holy Land.
Pleas'd with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man wou'd hake
His years away, and aa his young encounters:
Then, having shew'd his wounds, he'd fit him down,
And all the live-long day discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshal'd hofis;
Dcfcrib'd the motions, and explained the tife
Of the deep column, and the lengthcn'd line,
The square, the crcfcent, and the phalanx firm.
For all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vail art, was to this hermit known.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Why did this soldier in a defart hide

Those

Those qualities, that should have grac'd a camp ?

NORVAL.

That too at last I learn'd. Unhappy man
Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honours bravely won,
A rude and boift'rous captain of the sea
Faften'd a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought:
The firanger fell, and with his dying breath
Declar'd his name and lineage. Mighty God !
The soldier cried, my brother ! Oh ! my brother s

Lady RANDOLPH.
His brother !

NORVAL.

Yes; of the fame parents born;
His only brother. They exchang'd forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor fuffer'd,
In the wild defart on a rock he fits,
Or on ome nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times alas ! not in his perfec mind !
Holds dialogues with his lov'd brother's ghofl;
And oft each night forsakes his fullen couch,
To make fad orisons for him he flew.

Lady RANDOLPH.

To what mysterious woes are mortals born !
In this dire tragedy were there no more
Unhappy persons ? Did the parents live i

NORVAL.

No they were dead: kind heav'n clos'd their eyes
Before their on had shed his brother's blood.

Lord RANDCLPH.

Hard is his fate; for he was not to blame !
There is a defliny in this firange world,

Which

Which oft decrees an undeserved doom:
Let fchoolmen tell us why-From whence these founds ?

['Trumpets at a difance.
Enter an OFFICER.

OFFICER.

My Lord, the trumpets of the troops of Lorn:
Their valiant leader hails the noble RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Mine ancient guest ! does he the warriors lead ?
Has Denmark rous'd the brave old knight to arms ?

OFFICER.

No; worn with warfare, he resigns the sword.
His eldest hope, the valiant John of Lorn,
Now leads his kindred bands.

Lord RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON, go.

With hospitality's molt strong request
Entreat the chief.

[Exit GLENALVOI;

OFFICER.

My lord, requests are vain.

He urges on, impatient of delay,
Stung with the tidings of the foe's approach.

Lord RANDOLPH.

May victory fit on the warrior's plume !
Bravelf of men ! his flocks and herds are safe;
Remote from war's alarms his pastures lye,
By mountain's inaccessible fecur'd:
Yet foremost he into the plain defccnds,
Eager to bleed in battles not his own.
Such were the heroes of the ancient world:
Contemners they of indolence and gain;
BJt fill for love of glory and of arms,

E Prone

Prone to encounter peril, and to lift
Against each strong antagonist the spear.
'11 go and press the hero to my breast

[Exit RANDOLPB.
Xfanent Lady RANDOLPH and NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.

The soldier's loftinels, the pride and pomp
Invelting awful war, NORVAL, I fee,
Transport thy youthful mind.

NORVAL.

Ah ! should they not ?

Blest be the hour I left my father's house !
I might have been a hepherd all my days,
And stole obscurely to a peasant's grave,
Now, if I live, with mighty chiefs I fland ?
And, if I fall, with noble duff I lye.

Lady RANDOIPH.

There is a gen'rous spirit in thy breast,
That could have well fuftain'd a prouder fortune;
This way with me; under yon preading beech,
Unseen, unheard, by human eye or ear,
I will amaze thee with a wond'rous tale.

NORVAL.

Let there be danger, lady, with the secret,
That I may hug it to my grateful heart,
And prove my faith. Command my sword, my life:
These are the ole pofeflions of poor NORVAL.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Know'ft thou these gems ?

NORVAL.

Dur I believe mine eyes
I'd fay I knew them, and they were my father's.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Thy father's say's thou I ah ! they were thy father's !

NOR VAL

NORVAL.

I saw them once, and curiously enquir'd
Of both my parents, whence such splendor came ?
But I was check'd, and more could never learn.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Then learn of me, thou art not NORVAL'S son.

NORVAL.
Not NORVAL'S son!

Lady RANDOLPH.

Nor of a hepherd sprung.

NORVAL.
Lady, who am I then ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Noble thou art;
For noble was thy fire !

NORVAL.

I will believe---
0 ! tell me farther ! Say, who was my father

Lady RANDOLPH.
DOUGLAS!

NORVAL.
Lord DOUGLAS, whom to day I aw ?

Lady RANDOLPH.
His younger brother.

NORVAL.

And in yonder camp

Lady RANDOLPH.
Alas

NORVAL.

You make me tremble-Sighs and tearn
Lives my brave father

E2 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Ah ! too brave indeed i
He fell in battle ere thyself was born.

NOR VAL.

Ah me unhappy ! c:e I saw the light ?
But does my mother live ? I may conclude,
From my own fate, her portion has been sorrow.

Lady RANDOLPH.

She lives; but waftes her life in confiant woe,
'Weeping her husband slain, her infant loft.

NORVAL.

You that are fkill'd so well in the fad story
Of my unhappy parents, and with tears
Bewail their defliny, now have compallion
Upon the offspring of the friends you lov'd.
O ! tell me who, and where my mother is !
Opprefs'd by a base world, perhaps he bends
Beneath the weight of other ills than grief;
And desolate, implores of heav'n, the aid
Her son hould give. It is, it must be so-
Your countenance confesses that she's wretched.
O ! tell me her condition ! Can the sword-
Who hall resist me in a parent's cause

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy virtue ends her woe I-My son ! my son !
I am thy mother, and the wife of DOUGLAS !

[Falls upon his neck.

NoRVAL.

O heav'n and earth, how wond'rous is my fate !
Art thou my mother ? Ever let me kneel!

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Image of DOUGLAS ! Fruit of fatal lovc !
All that I owe thy fire I pay to thee.

NORVAL.

Refpet and admiration fill pofTefs me,
Checking the love and fondncfs of a son.
Yet I was filial to my humble parents.
But did my fire surpass the ret of men,
As thou excelleft all of womankind !

Lady RANDOLPH.

Arise ! my son ! In me thou dost behold
The poor remains of beauty once admir'd:
The autumn of my days is come already;
For sorrow made my summer haste away.
Yet in my prime I equall'd not thy father:
His eyes were like the eagle's, yet sometimes
Liker the dove's; and, as he pleas'd, he won
All hearts with softness, or with spirit aw'd.

NoRv AL.

How did he fall ? Sure 'twas a bloody field
When DOUGLAS died. O 1 have much to ask

Lady RANDOLPH.

Hereafter thou shalt hear the lengthen'd tale
Of all thy father's and thy mother's woes.
At present this: Thou art the rightful heir
Of yonder castle, and the wide domains
Which now Lord RANDOLPH, as my husband, holds.
But thou halt not be wrong'd; I have the power
To right thee still: Before the king I'll kneel,
And call Lord DOUGLAS to prote2 his blood.

NORV AL.
The blood of DOUGLAS will prote itfclf.

E 3 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

But we hall need both friends and favour, boy,
To wrest thy lands and lordship from the gripe
Of RANDOLPH and his kinsman. Yet I think
My tale will move each gentle heart to pity,
My life incline the virtuous to believe.

NORVAL.

To be the on of DOUGLAS is to me
Inheritance enough. Declare my birth,
And in the field 1'11 seek for fame and fortune.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thou dost not know what perils and injustice
Await the poor man's valour. 0 ! my son!
The noblest blood in all the land's abafh'd,
Having no lacquey but pale poverty.
Too long haft thou been thus attended, DOUGLAS !
Too long haft thou been deem'd a peasant's child.
The wanton heir of some inglorious chief
Perhaps has fcorn'd thee, in the youthful sports;
Whilst thy indignant spirit fwcll'd in vain !
Such contumely thou no more fllalt bear:
But how I purpose to redress thy wrongs
MIuft be hereafter told. Prudence directs
That we should part before yon chiefs return.
Retire, and from thy rultic follower's hand
Receive a billet, which thy mother's care,
Anxious to fee thee, dictated before
This casual opportunity arose
Of private conference. Its purport mark;
For as I there appoint we meet again.
Leave me, my Son ! and frame thy manners still
To NORVAL's, not to noble DOUGLAS' fate.

NORYAL.

I will remember. Where is NORVAL now ?
That good old man.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

At hand conceal'd he lies,

An useful witness. But beware, my son,
Of yon GLENALVON ; in hs guilty breast
Resides a villain's hrewdnefs, ever prone
To false conjecture. He hath griev'd my heart.

NORVA..

Has he indeed ? Then let yon faire GLENALVO
Beware of me.

[Exit DOUGLAS.

Manet Lady RANDOLPH.

There burfi the fmothcr'd flame

O ! thou all righteous and eternal King !
Who father of the fatherless art call'd,
Protet my on Thy inspiration, Lord !
Hath fill'd his bosom with that sacred fire,
Which in the breasts of his forefathers burn'd
Set him on high like them, that he may fliRe
The star and glory of his native land !
Then let the minister of death descend,
And bear my willing pirit to its place.
Yonder they come. How do bad women find
Unchanging afpcAs to conceal their guilt ?
When I by reason, and by justice urg'd,
Full hardly can dissemble with these men
In nature's pious cause.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yon gallant chief,
Of arms enamour'd, all repose disclaims.

E 4 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Be not, my lord, by his example fway'd:
Arrange the business of to-morrow now,
And, when you enter, peak of war no more.

[Exit Lady RANDOLPH.
Manent Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis so, by heav'n ! her mien, her voice, her eye,
And her impatience to be gone, confirm it.

GLENALVON.

He parted from her now: Behind the mount,
Amongst the trees, I saw him glide along.

Lord RANDOLPH.
For fad fequefter'd virtue fle's renown'd !

GLENALVON.
Most true my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Yet this diftinguifh'd dame

Invites a youth, the acquaintance of a day,
Alone to meet her at the midnight hour.
This aflignation, (hews a letter) the affaflin freed,
Her manifest affetion for the youth,
Might breed suspicion in a husband's brain,
Whose gentle consort all for love had wedded:
Much more in mine. MATILDA never lov'd me.
Let no man, after me, a woman wed,
Whose heart he knows he has not; though she brings
A mine of gold, a kingdom for her dowry.
For let her seem, like the night's hadowy queen,
Cold and contemplative ;-He cannot trust her:
She may, lhe will, bring shame and sorrow on him;
The worst of sorrow, and the worst of shames !

G LENALVON.

GLENALVON.

Yield not, my Lord, to such affliding thoughts i
But let the spirit of an husband sleep,
'Till your own senses make a sure conclusion.
This billet muff to blooming NORVAL go:
At the next turn awaits my trusty spy;
I'll give it him refitted for his matter.
In the close thicket take your secret fLand;
The moon shines bright, and your own eyes may judge
Of their behaviour.

Lord RANDOLPH.
Thou dost counsel well.

GLENAL V ON.

Permit me now to make one flight essay.
Of all the trophies which vain mortals boast,
By wit, by valour, or by wisdom won,
The first and fairefd, in a young man's eye,
Iswoman's captive heart. Successful love
With glorious fumes intoxicates the mind;
And the proud conqueror in triumph moves
Air-born, exalted above vulgar men.

Lord RANDOLPH.
And what avails this maxim ?

GLENALVON.

Much, my Lord !

Withdraw a little : I'll accost young NORVAL,
And with ironical derisive counfcl
Explore his spirit. If he is no more
Than humble NORVAL, by thy favour rais'd
Brave as he is, he'll (brink aflonifh'd from me:
But if he be the favourite of the fair,
Lov'd by the first of Caledonia's dames,
He'll turn upon me, as the lion turns
Upon the hunter's spear.

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Tis shrewdly thought.

GL-

GLENALVON.

When we grow loud, draw near. But let my Lord
His rising wrath refirain.

[Exit RANDOLPH.

Manet GLENALVON.

'Tis ifrange, by heav'n !

That fle should run full tilt her fond career,
To one so little known. She too that feem'd
Pure as the winter fiream, when ice cmbofs'd
Whitens its course. Even I did think her chaffe,
Whose charity exceeds not. Precious ex !
l'hofe deeds lascivious pass GLENALVON'S thoughts I

[NORVAL appears.

His port I love; he's in a proper mood
To chide the thunder, if at him it roar'd.
Has NORVAL seen the troops ?

NORVAL.

The setting fun,

With yellow radiance lighten'd all the vale,
And as the warriors mov'd, each polish'd helm,
Cornet, or spear, glanc'd back his gilded beams.
The hill they climb'd, and halting at its top,
Of more than mortal size, tow'ring, they feem'd
An host angelic, clad in burning arms.

GLENALVON.

Thou talk'fl it well; no leader of our host
In founds more lofty speaks of glorious war.

NORVAL.

If I hall e'er acquire a leader's name,
My speech will be less ardent. Novelty
Now prompts my tongue, and youthful admiration
Vents itself freely; since no part is mine
Of praise, pertaining to the great in arms.

GLI-

GLENALVON.

You wrong yourself, brave Sir; your martial deeds
Have rank'd you with the great: but mark me, NoT", ,,;
Lord RANDOLPH'S favour now exalts your youth
Above his veterans of famous service.
Let me, who know these soldiers, counsel you.
Give them all honour; seem not to command;
Else they will scarcely brook your late sprung power,
Which nor alliance props, no birth adorns.

NOR VAL.

Sir, I have been accuflomed all my days
To hear and peak the plain and simple truth:
And though I have been told, that there are men
Who borrow fricndfhip's tongue to speak their scorn,
Yet in such language I am little kill'd.
Therefore I thank GLENALVON for his counftl,
Although it founded harshly. Why remind
Me of my birth obscure ? Why slur my power
With such contemptuous terms ?

GLENALVON.

I did not mean
To gall your pride, which now I fee is great.

NORVAL.
My pride!

GLENALVON.

Suppress it as you with to prosper.

Your pride's excessive. Yet for RANDOLPH'S fake
I will not leave you to its rash dire&ion.
If thus you swell, and frown at high-born men,
Will high-born men endure a fhcpherd's scorn ?

NORVAL.

NORVAL.
A lhepherd's scorn !

GLENALVON.
Yes; if you prcfumc

To bend on soldiers thefc disdainful eyes,
As if you took the measure of their minds,
And said in secret, you're no match for me;
What will become of you ?

NORVAL.

If this were told !- [jid.
Haft thou no fears for thy presumptuous self!

GLEALVON.
Ha ! dost thou threaten me ?

NOR VAL.

Didft thou not hear ?

GLENALVON.

Unwillingly I did; a nobler foe
Had not been queftion'd thus. But such as thee--

NORVAL.
Whom dolt thou think me ?

GLENALVON.

Norval.

NORVAL.

So I am-
And who is NORVAL in GLENALVON'S eyes ?

GLENALVON.

A peasant's son, a wandering beggar-boy;
At best no more, even if he speaks the truth.

NORVAL.
Falfc as thou art, dost thou fufpeA my truth ?

GLE-

GLENALVON.

Thy truth ! thou'rt all a lye; and false as hell
Is the vain-glorious tale thou told'ft to RANDOLPH.

NORVAL.

If I were chain'd, unarm'd, and bed-rid old,
Perhaps I hould revile: But as I am
I have no tongue to rail. The humble NORVAL
Is of a race, who firive not but with deeds.
Did I not fear to freeze thy shallow valour,
And make thee fink too soon beneath my sword,
I'd tell thee what thou art. I know thee well.

GLENALVON.

Didft thou not know GLENALVON, born to command
Ten thousand slaves like thee ?

NORVAL.
Villain no more:

Draw and defend thy life. I did design
To have defy'd thee in another cause:
But heav'n accelerates its vengeance on thee.
Now for my own and Lady RANDOLPH'S wrongs.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Hold, I command you both. The man that firs
Makes me his foe.

NORVAL.

Another voice than thine
That threat had vainly founded, noble RANDOLPH.

GLENALVON.

Hear him, my Lord; he's wond'rous condescending !
Mark the humility of ihephcrd NoaVAL !

NORVAL.
Now you may scoff in safety.

[ShIaths his sword.

Lord

Lord RANDOLPH.

Speak not thus,

Taunting each other; but unfold to me
The cause of quarrel, then I judge betwixt you.

NORVAL.

Nay, my good Lord, tho' I revere you much,
My cause plead not, nor demand your judgment.
I blufl to speak; I will not, cannot speak
Th' opprobrious words that I from him have borne.
To the liege-lord of my dear native land
I owe a fubjea's homage: but ev'n him
And his high arbitration I'd rejet.
Within my bosom reigns another lord;
Honour, sole judge, and umpire of itself.
If my free speech offend you, noble RANDOLPH,
Revoke your favours, and let NORVAL go
Hence as he came, alone, but not dishonoured.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thus far I'll mediate with impartial voice:
The ancient foe of Caledonia's land
Now waves his banners o'er her frighted fields.
Suspend your purpose, 'till your country's arms
Repel the bold invader: then decide
The private quarrel.

GLENALVON.

I agree to this.
NORVAL.
And Il

Enter SERVANT.

SERVANT.
The banquet awaits.

Lord RANDOLPH.

We come.

[Exit RANDOLPH.
GLENALVON.

Norval,

Let

Let not our variance mar the social hour,
Nor wrong the hospitality of RANDOLPH.
Nor frowning anger, nor yet wrinkled hate,
Shall stain my countenance. Sooth thou thy brow;
Nor let our firife disturb the gentle dame.

NORVAL.

Think not so lightly, Sir, of my resentment:
When we contend again, our strife is mortal.

The End of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT

# ACT V. SCENE I.

ACT V. SCENE I.

fbe Wood.

Enter DOUGLAS.

H I S is the place, the centre of the grove;
Here flands the oak, the monarch of the wood,

How sweet and solemn is the midnight scene !
The silver moon, unclouded, holds her way
Thro' skies where I could count each little flar.
The fanning weft wind scarcely firs the leaves;
The river, rushing o'er its pebbled bed,
Imposes silence with a fiilly found.
In such a place as this, at such an hour,
If ancestry can be in ought believed,
Descending fpitits have convers'd with man,
And told the recrets of the world unknown.

Enter Old NORVAL.

Old NORVAL.

'Tis he. But what if he should chide me hence ?
His just reproach I fear.

[DOUGLAS turns and/fis 1im,
Forgive, forgive,

Can'fl thou forgive the man, the selfish man,
Who bred Sir MALCOLM'S heir a hepherd's son.

DOUGLAS.

Kneel not to me: thou art my father still:
Thy wilh'd-for presence now compleats my joy.

Welcome

Velcome to me, my fortunes thou halt share,
And ever honoured with thy DOUGLAS live.

Old NORYAL.

And doff thou call me father ? 0 my son !
I think that I could die to make amends
For the great wrong I did thee. 'Twas my crime
Which in the wilderness so long conceal'd
The blossom of thy youth.

DOUGLAS.

Not worse the fruit,

That in the wilderness the blossom blow'd.
Amongst the hepherds, in the humble cot,
I learn'd ome leftnos, which I'll not forget
When I inhabit yonder lofty towers.
I, who was once a swain, will ever prove
The poor man's friend; and, when my vassals bow,
NORVAL hall smooth the crested pride of DOUGLAS.

NORVAL.

Let me but live to fee thine exaltation !
Yet grievous are my fears. O leave this place,
And those unfriendly towers.

DOUGLAS.
Why should I leave them ?
NORVAL.
Lord RANDOLPH and his kinsman seek your life.

DOUGLAS..
How know'ft thou that ?

NORVAL.

I will inform you how.

When evening came, I left the fecrt place
Appointed for me by your mother's care,
And fondly trod in each accuRtomed path
That to the catle leads. Whilst thus I rang'd,
I was alarmed with unexpeted founds

F Of

Of earnest voices. On the perlbns came:
Unseen I lurk'd, and overheard them name
Each other as they talk'd, lord RANDOLPH thi,
And that GLENALVON : still of you they spoke,
And of the lady: threatning was their fpecch,
Tho' but imperfealy my ear could hear it.
'Twas strange, they said, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

DOUGLAS.
Revenge ! for what ?

NORVAL.

For being what you are;

Sir MALCOLM'S heir: how else have you offended ?
When they were gone, I hied me to my cottage,
And there fat musing how I best might find
Means to inform you of their wicked purpole.
But I could think of none: at last perplex'd
I iflued forth, encompafling the tower
With many a weary ftep and wishful look.
Now providence hath brought you to my fight,
Let not your too courageous spirit scorn
The caution which I give.

DOUGLAS.

I scorn it not.

My mother warn'd me of GLbNALVON'S bafnefs:
But I will not fufpet the noble RANDOLPH.
In our encounter with the vile afFafins,
I mark'd his brave demeanor: him I'll trust.

NORVAL.
I fear you will too far.

DOUGLAS.

Here in this place

I wait my mother's coming: the flall know
What thou haft told: her counsel I will follow:

And

And cautious ever are a mother's counsels.
You muRf depart i your presence may prevent
Our interview.

NORYAL.

My blessing reft upon thee !

O may heav'n's hand, which fav'd thee from the wave,
And from the sword of foes, be near thee still;
Turning mischance, if ought hangs o'er thy head,
All upon mine !

[Exit Old NORIAL.

DOUGLAS.
He loves me like a parent;

And must not, hall not lose the son he loves,
Altho' his son has found a nobler father.
Eventful day ! how haft thou chang'd my state
Once on the cold, and winter shaded fide
Of a bleak hill, mischance had rooted me,
Never to thrive, child of another foil:
Transplanted now to the gay funny vale,
Like the green thorn of May my fortune flowers.
Ye glorious stars ! high heav'n's resplendent hoR !
To whom I oft have of my lot complain'd,
Hear and record my foul's unalter'd wilh I
Dead or alive, let me but be renown'd !
May heav'n inspire some fierce gigantic Dane,
To give a bold defiance to our host I
Before he speaks it out I will accept;
Like DOUGLAS conquer, or like DOUGLAS die.

Enter Lady RANDOLPH.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My son I I hard a voice-

DOUGLAS.
-The voice was mine.

2 Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Didft thou complain aloud to nature's ear,
That thus in dusky hades, at midnight hours,
By etcalth the mother and the son hould meet ?

[Embracing him.

DOUGLAS.

No; on this happy day, this better birth-day,
My thoughts and words are all of hope and joy.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Sad fear and melancholy still divide
The empire of my breast with hopc and joy.
Now hear what I advise.

DOUGLAS.

First, let me tell
What may the tenor of your counsel change.

Lady RANDOLPH.
My heart forebodes some evil !

DOUGLAS.

'Tis not good.-

At eve, unseen by RANDOLPH and GLENALVON,
The good old NORVAL in the grove o'erheard
Their conversation: oft they mention'd me
W\\ith dreadful threatnings; you they rometimes nam'd.
'Twas firange, they aid, a wonderful difcov'ry;
And ever and anon they vow'd revenge.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Defend us gracious God ! we are betray'd:
They have found out the fccrct of thy birth
It mufd be so. That is the great discovery.
Sir MALCOLM'S heir is come to claim his own;
And they will be rcveng'd. Perhaps even now,
Arm'd and prepar'd for murder, they but wait,
A darkcr and more silent hour, to break

law

Into the chamber where they think thou fleep'ft.
This moment, this, heav'n hath ordain'd to save thee 1
Fly to the camp, my son !

DOUGLAS.

And leave you here ?

No : to the castle let us go together,
Call up the antient servants of your house,
Who in their youth did eat your father's bread.
Then tell them loudly that I am your son.
If in the breasts of men one spark remains
Of sacred love, fidelity, or pity,
Some in your cause will arm. I ak but few
To drive those spoilers from my father's house.

Lady RANDOLPH.

O nature, nature ! what can check thy force
Thou genuine offspring of the daring DOUGLAS !
But rush not on deftruaion: save thyself,
And I am safe. To me they mean no harm.
Thy stay but risks thy precious life in vain.
That winding path conducts thee to the river.
Cross where thou feeft a broad and beaten way,
Which running eastward leads thee to the camp.
Intant demand admittance to Lord DOUGLAS !
Shew him these jewels, which his brother wore.
Thy look, thy voice, will make him feel the truth,
Which I by certain proof will oon confirm.

DOUG LAS.

I yield me, and obey: but yet my heart
Bleeds at this parting. Something bids me flay
And guard a mother's life. Oft have I read
Of wond'rous deeds by one bold arm atchiev'd.
Our foes are two; no more: let me go forth,
And fee if any shield can guard GLENALVON.

Lady RANDOLPH.

If thou regard'ft thy mother, or rever'ft
Thy father's memory, think of this no more.

F 3 One

One thing I have to fay before we part:
Long wert thou loft; and thou art found, my child,
In a most fearful season. War and battle
I have great cause to dread. Too well I fee
Which way the current of thy temper sets:
To-day I've found thee. Oh ! my long loft hope
If thou to giddy valour giv'ft the rein,
To-morrow I may lose my son for ever.
The love of thee before thou faw'ft the light,
Sustained my life when thy brave father fell.
If thou (halt fall, I have nor love nor hope
In this waste world I my son remember me !

DOUGLAS.

What shall I fay ? how can I give you comfort ?
-The God of battles of my life dispose
As may be best for you I for whose dear fake
I will not bear myself as I refolv'd.
But yet confider, as no vulgar name
That which I boast founds amongst martial men.
How will inglorious caution suit my claim
The post of fate unthrinking I maintain.
My country's foes must witness who I am.
On the invaders heads I'll prove my birth,
'Till friends and foes conses the genuine firain.
If in this firife I fall, blame not your son,
Who if he lives not honour'd, must not live.

Lady RANDOLPH.

I will not utter what my bosom feels.
Too well I love that valour which I warn.
Farewell, my son ! my counsels are but vain.

[ Embrating.
And as high heaven hath will'd it all must be. [fparatt.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Gaze not on me, thou wilt mistake the path;

I'll

rll point it out again.

[Ju/i as they are fiparating, enterfrom the wood

Lord RANDOLPH and GLENALVON.
Lord RANDOLPH.

Not in her presence.
Now

GLENALVON.

I'm prepar'd.
Lord RANDOLPH.

No: I command thee stay.

I go alone: it never hall be said
That I took odds to combat mortal man.
The noblest vengeance is the most compleat.

[Exit Lord RANDOLPH.
[GLENALVON makes fame feps to the fam

fide of theflage, liflens andj/eaks.

GLENALVON.

Demons of death come fettle on my sword,
And to a double slaughter guide it home !
The lover and the husband both must die.

[Lord RANDOLPH behind thefcens.
Lord RANDOLPH.
Draw, Villain draw.

DOUGLAS.

Assail me not, Lord RANDOLPH;
Not as thou lov'ft thyself.

[Claing offwords.

[GLENALVON running out.

Now is the time.
Enter Lady RANDOLPH, at the opposite fide of the stage,

faint and breathless.
Lady RANDOLPH.
Lord RANDOLPH hear me; all shall be thine own i

F 4. But

But pare ! Oh spare my son !

Enter DOUGLAS with a sword in earh hand.

My mother's voice !
I can prote& thee still.

Lady RAr'DOLPI.

He lives, he lives:

For this, for this to heaven eternal praise !
But sure I saw thee fall.

DOUGLAS.

It was GLENALVO.',

Just as my arm had mafter'd RANDOLPH'S sword,
The villain came behind me; but I flew him.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Behind thee ! Ah ! thou'rt wounded ! O my child,
How pale thou look' ! and shall I lose thee now ?

DOUGLAS.

Do not despair : I feel a little faintness;
I hope it will not last.

[Leans upon his sword.
Lady RANDOLPH.

There is no hope !

And we must part ! the hand of death is on thee !
O my beloved child O DOUGLAS, DOUGLAS.

[DCUGLAS growing more and more sant.

DOUGLAS.

Too oon we part: I have not long been DOUGLAS.
O dcftiny ! hardly thou dealft with me:
Clouded and hid, a stranger to myself,
In low and poor obscurity I liv'd.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Has heav'n preferv'd thee for an end like this ?

DOUGLAS.
O had I fallen as my brave fathers fell,

Turning

Turning with fatal arm the tide of battle !
Like them I should have fmil'd and welcom'd death.
But thus to perish by a villain's hand !
Cut off from nature's and from glory's course,
VWhich never mortal was so fond to run.

Lady RANDOLPH.
Hear justice ! hear are these the fruits of virtue ?

DOUGLASfals.

DOUGLAS.

Unknown I die; no tongue shall speak of me.---
Some noble spirits, judging by themselves,
May yet conjecture what I might have prov'd,
And think life only wanting to my fame;
But who fball comfort thee ?

Lady RANDOLPH.

Despair I despair 1

DOUGLAS.

O had it pleas'd high heaven to let me live
A little while !-my eyes that gaze on thee
Grow dim apace ! my mother--- [D.

Enter Lord RANDOLPH and ANNA.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Thy words, the words of truth, have pierc'd my heart,
I am the stain of knighthood and of arms.
Oh ! if my brave deliverer survives
The traitor's sword-

ANNA.
Alas ! look there, my Lord.

Lord RANDOLPH.

The mother and her Son ! How curfi I am !
Was I the cause ? No: I was not the caufc.
Yon matchless villain did reduce my foul
To frantic jealousy.

ANNA.

ANNA.

My Lady lives:

The agony of grief hath but fupprefs'd
A while her powers.

Lord RANDOLPH.

But my deliverer's dead !

The world did once elteem Lord RANDOLPH well,
Sincere of heart, for spotless honour fam'd:
And, in my early days, glory I gain'd
Beneath the holy banner of the cross.
Now past the noon of life, hame comes upon me;
Reproach, and infamy, and public hate,
Are near at hand: for all mankind will think
That RANDOLPH basely fab'd Sir MALCOLM'S heir.

[Lady RANDOLPH recoverinr.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Where am I now ? Still in this wretched world !
Grief cannot break a heart so hard as mine.
My youth was worn in anguish: but youth's strength,
With hope's affifiance, bore the brunt of sorrow;
And train'd me on to be the obje& now,
On which omnipotence displays itself,
Making a fpetacle, a tale of me,
To awe its vasal, man.

Lord RANDOLPH.

0 mifcry

Amidst thy raging grief I must proclaim
My innocence.

Lady RANDOLPH.

Thy innocence !
Lord RANDOLPH.

My guilt
Is innocence, compar'd with what thou think'ft it.

Lady

Lady RANDOLPH.

Of thee I think not : what have I to do
With thee, or any thing ? My son ! my son !
My beautiful ! my brave how proud was I
Of thee, and of thy valour ! my fond heart
O'erflow'd this day with transport, when I thought
Of growing old amidst a race of thine,
Who might make up to me their father's childhood,
And bear my brother's and my husband's name:
Now all my hopes are dead ! A little while
Was I a wife ! a mother not so long !
What am I now ?-I know.- But I shall be
That only whilst I please; for such a on
And such a husband make a woman bold.

[Runs out.

Lord RANDOLPH.

Follow her, ANNA: I myself would follow,
But in this rage she must abhor my presence.

[Exit ANMA.
Enter Old NORVAL.

NORVAL.
I heard the voice of woe: heaven guard my child !

Lord RANDOLPH.

Already is the idle gaping crowd,
The spiteful vulgar, come to gaze on RANDOLPH.
Begone.

NORV AL.

I fear thee not. I will not go.
Here I'll remain. I'm an accomplice, Lord,

With

With thee in murder. Yes, my fins did help
To cru(h down to the ground this lovely plant.
O noblest youth that ever yet was born !
Sweetest and best, gentlest and bravest spirit,
That ever blefs'd the world ! Wretch that I am,
Who saw that noble spirit swell and rife
Above the narrow limits that confin'd it !
Yet never was by all thy virtues won
To do thejuflice, and reveal the secret,
Which timely known, had rais'd thee far above
The villain's snare. Oh ! I am punifh'd now !
These are the hairs that should have ftrew'd the ground,
And not the locks of DOUGLAS.

[Tears his hair, and throws

himftif upon the ground.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I know thee now: thy boldness I forgive;
My crest is fallen. For thee I will appoint
A place of reft, if grief will let thee refl.
I will reward, altho' I cannot punish.
Curi, curfi GLENALVON, he efcap'd too well,
Tho' slain and baffled by the hand he hated.
Foaming with rage and fury to the last,
Cursing his conqueror, the felon died.

Enter ANNA.

ANNA.
My Lord ! my Lord !

Lord RANDOLPIH.

Speak: I can hear of horror.

ANNA,

ANNA.
Horror indeed !

Lord RANDOLPH.

MATILDA?

ANNA.
Is no more:

She ran, she few like light'ning up the hill,
Nor halted till the precipice she gain'd,
Beaneath whose low'ring top the river falls
Ingulph'd in rifted rocks: thither she came,
As fearless as the eagle lights upon it,
And headlong down-

Lord RANDOLPH.

'Twas I ! alas ! 'twas I

That fill'd her breast with fury: drove her down
The precipice of death ! Wretch that I am !

ANNA.

O had you seen her las despairing look !
Upon the brink he food, and cast her eyes
Down in the deep: then lifting up her head
And her white hands to heaven, seeming to fay,
Why am I forc'd to this ? She plung'd herself
Into the empty air.

Lord RANDOLPH.

I will not vent,

In vain complaints, the passion of my foul.
Peace in this world I never can enjoy.
These wounds the gratitude of RANDOLPH gave.
They speak aloud, and with the voice of fate

Denounce

Denounce my doom. I am refolv'd. I'll go
Straight to the battle, where the man that makes
Me turn aside rust threaten worse than death.
Thou, faithful to thy miilrefs, take this ring,
Full warrant of my power. Let every rite
With coRf and pomp upon their funerals wait:
For RANDOLPH hopes he never hall return.

F IN IS.

# EPILOGUE.

EPILO G U E.

Spoken by Mr. B A R R Y.
A N Epilogue 1 ajk'd; but not one word

Our bard will write. He vows 'tis moi absurd

WFith comic wit to contradilt the lirain
Of tragedy, and make your orrows vain.
Sadly he ays, that pity is the beJI,
And noble/t pajfion of the human breal :
For when itsfacred freams the heart o'er-flow,
In gujhes pleasure with the tide of woe;
And when its waves retire, like those of Nile,
They leave behind them such a golden fail,
Tbat there the virtues without culture grow,
There thefweet blo/oms of ajffilion blow.
These were his words; void of deluive art
felt them; for he spoke them from bis heart.
Nor will I now attempt, with witty foll,
To choaf away cle/lial melancholy.
