FTHE
DRAMArIC WORKS

OF
JOHN HOME, Eso.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

V 0 L, II.

CONTAINING ':

THE FATAL DISCOVERY; I AND -

.

ALONZO; I' ALFRED. ,
- ;

EDI-NB UR G:

PRINTED BY GEs&.REID & CO.
Baillie's Land, opposite Magdalane Chapel, Cowgatc.

1798.

# THE FATAL DISCOVERY. A TRAGEDY.

THE
FA2'AL DISCOVERtE.I

A
TRAGEDY.

Moriens animram abJ/ulit ho/i.

im ifuper exanimn'.tfefe projecit aricam,

Confofais, placidaque ibi demum morte quievit.
Fortunati ambo !-Si quid mea carmina pouimt
Ntlla dies unquam memori vos eximet vieo.

VIRG.

# PROLOGUE SPOKEN BY MR BARRY.

PROLOGUE

SPOKEN BT MR DARRrt.
IJH ENffrl the children of the mrufe began

To try their magic on the mind of man,

-AJonijh'd mortals saw, with ,wooid'ring eyes,
The fair creation of the bard arise.
Hence is deriv'd the Poet's lofty name,
For Poet and Creator mean the.fa/me;
He, from his fancg, where the feeds of things,
As in a chaos lie, to order brings
Worlds of his own, and builds the lofty rhyme
Whofepolij/,'drength defies the rage of tine.

Such were the bards, whom we to call divine,

Homer the father of the godlike line,
7Te Mantuani bard, whom all mankind admire'
For sweet exprejon andfor vej6aljfie.
Shakespeare and Milton, both in England born,
Whose glorious names the Zueen of IJIes adorn,
Who, proudlyfitting on' her azure throne,
In arts and empire will no equalown. *.

Thusfar our Author as a Prologue writ,

And would have been, I think, a-writing yet,.
Enamoar'd of his theme.-But I drew sear,
And wbifper'd that of him you wih'd to hear;

'Twas dfficult hefaid-infuch a cafe

He could have wijh'd another in hisplace ,
To tell with what alternate hopes and fears,.
An anrious Author on the Stage appears

Fora.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

For, like the nightigale, he hath aadreJI
Hinfelf totiing-a thorn at his fond breajq.
-If, like the native warbler of the grove,
His plaintive notes are full of tender love;
Tour hand may pull the thorn that caus'd his paini.

ind give him fpiritfor a noblerJlrain.

DRAMATIS PERSONZ£.

M E N.

KATHUL, King of the Isles, Mr JEFFERSON.
DURSTAN, King of the Pits, Mr PALMER.
RONAN, Prince of Morven, Mr BARRY.
CONNAN, Mr AICKEN.
ORELLANP Mr REDDISH.
EURAN, Mr J. AICKEN.
CALMAR, Mr STRANGE.
MESSENGER, Mr KEEN.

WOMAN.
RIVINE, Mrs BARRY, .

SUBJECTS, CHIEFS, <'g.

# ACT I.

TlE
FATdAL DISCOS OERr.

ACT I.

SCENE, A Grove, with Trees blown down.
Enter K.TIIUL, King of the IJes, andfevcral of his

Attendants.
,Jl Attend. d ING ofthe Isles-

.K Kath. I'll hear no more: begone!

Back to the mountains where you left your lord,
Nor dare return without him to the vale.

[Exit Attendants.

Enter EURAN.
.Eur. How have those men provok'd their prince's

wrath ?

Soft is tlhe voice of KATrUL to his people.
What evil have they done ?

Kath. My faithful, EURA ! .

Those dastards left their mafier in the storm'
That rose at eve: my son hath pass'd the night
Alone upon the hill beyond the lake.

Eur, Of him no fear; both hill and dale he knows,

B Cavern

Cavern and cave, and every fhelter'd spot
Of the wide forest.

Kath. Not one moment's peace

Have I enjoy'd, since to the Pi&iih King
I gave my daughter's hand. Unhappy, ihe
In secret anguish pines her life away !
My son, affli&ed, 'huns his father's fight,
And, in the woods and forests, waftes his days,
A lonely hunter. To complete my woes,
Our new ally keeps not his promis'd time;
Is this his Pieaih faith ?

Eur. Doubt not, O king !

Doubt not the faith of DURSTAN, nor the love
He bears his queen.-Soon fliall you fee his fails
Rife on the diltant wave, white as the fowls
That chace the flying floals.-When he arrives,
Let not indulgence grant the least delay,
But waft RIVINE to the Pi&ifh fliore.
When she has left the place, where every tree
And rock and haunted fiream recal the memory
Of what {he should forget, her grief will fly
like mist before the wind.

Kath. Rather the mifl

Will thicken into darkness. EuRAN, my heart
Misgives and chides itself. Sprung as I am
From antient Albion, in her evil days
I left her lhatter'd fide. By passion fway'd
And rage at perjur'd RONAN, I forsook
The stock of which I came, and join'd myself
By Ifria alliance to her mortal foe;
To him, whose arm had hew'd her branches down.
From deeds, like this, in wrong of nature done,
Obfervcrs date commencement of decay,

And itrange disaster to the. guilty line.

Euir. Disaster seize on him who broke his faith,

And threw away the pearl of womankind !
O ! could my with recal that signal hour,
When Elig's hall blaz'd with a thousand ihields
Of kings and heroes. Emulous to please
The all-admir'd daughter of the Isles!
RIVINE, partial to her brother's friend,
Preferr'd the Prince of Morven; 'tho' by far,
In wealth and power, inferior to the Pit,
And other royal suitors for her love.
Yet he, diftinguifh'd, favour'd, honoured thusy
Ungrateful man ! forsook the matchless maid;
Without complaint, pretence, abandon'd her,
To wed the queen. of Erin *-In my mind
Most happily for thee,. and: for thy house;
Else thou, the friend of vanquifh'd Albion, itill
Hadit shar'd the fortunes of a ruin'd people.-

Kath.. Not ruin'd. yet-

Eur. Expel'd their native land,
Their king and more than half his princes slain.

Kath. Another king succeeds: Congallus claims

His right of blood. Here in the bay last night
A rover of the main his vessel moor'd ;
He told me he had seen, on Norway's coast,
A fleet immense: far off, it feem'd a wood,
Stretching from cape to cape ; as if the firs
From their eternal mountains had come down,
To grow amidit the waves.

Eurt. Was this-huge fleet
Prepar'd againit the Pi&t ?

B 2 Kat:.
,Ireland.-

Kath. It was; and charg'd

With mighty armies: both the kings were there
Of Lochlin-f and of Norway.-On the deck
Of one, the headmofc ship, Congallus llood,
Wooing the winds to fill his hoilled fails:
With him a multitude of warriors, born
Ia various climes, of the Albanian race;
Who, though they never saw their father's land;
Call it their country too. The foremolt they,
The ficrceft in her cause.

Eur. 'Tis RONAN'S caufce!

For him the sons of Erin lift the spear
For 'im the kings of Scandinavia arm.
But let them come, the pirates of the North -
Strong is the Pict, and mighty his allies!
Who can refill the Romans ?

Kath. By their forcee

And not his own, tho' he is great in arms,
The Pift o'er Albion's warlike sons prevail'd;
But new the Roman eagle southward flies
The dark-ey'd clief his legions has withdrawn,
To quell the Britons 5 nor can DURSTA.1 hope
Their prefiut :id.-

Eur. -I trull lie shall not need !
Behold RIVINE comes- [Looking towards the wood..

Kahn. -Entranc'd in thought-

See how file toff-s to the Ikies her arms,
NowV wrings her folded hands! Thus is Ihe wont
To wander thro' the woods, ever alone,
And ever mourning. Like a wounded deer,
Apart fie tal'ks and seeks the darkefi fiade

Of
t Denmark.

Of hanging rocks, and-melancholy boughs,
To hide and nourish her determin'd sorrow.-
Let us avoid her. 0 ! unhappy child!
I fear thy father's counsel has undone thee ! [Exeunt.-

Enter RIVINE.

Rvz. How soon is evil done! The sycamores,.

The pines, whose bulk successive ages rear'd,
The tempest of one night hath overthrown!.
Thou too art fallen, thou fair and stately oak,
Beneath whose pleasant ihade RIVINE fate,
When first fle listen'd to false RONAN'S love.
O ! thou expressive emblem of my state!
Like thee, the chief in beauty and in place,
I flouriflh'd once ; now rooted up like thee,,.
I wither on the field. Daily I die !
Delighted, I perceive my swift decay.
There will I make my grave; under that rock.
In peace shall reft the daughter of the Isles,
Who, 'till ihe's laid in earth, no peace can know.
No peace for me ! 0 ! how I envy you,
Ye lovelorn maids ! who, flighted and forsaken,
Yet entertain no motion of revenge,
But mildly bear your wrongs, decline and die,
The blameless vitims of inconstant man!

Enter CONNAN.

Ha ! does my'brother come to fee RIVINE !
What has procur'd me this unwonted favour? -

Con. Perhaps in prudence, and in love to.thee,

I should conceal my tidings; but my heart-
Cannot contain them. Tho' it make thee wretched,
Yet I must tell thee, that my friend is wrong'd.

B 3 RONAN

RCNAN is innocent; he loves thee still;
He never ceas'd to love thee !

Riv. I believe it..

He never ceas'd to love, who never lov'd.
But why pretend, why counterfeit again ?
Has Erin's queen found out how falle he is,
And thrown the specious traitor from her arms .
And does he think once more to find RivisE
Free, credulous, and fit to be deceiv'd ?
But me he thinks not of; he courts thy aid
He needs the valour of his partial friend.
A firanger iill to what his crimes have done,
He knows not who I am ;- he does not know,
That CONNAN'S valour guards the Pidifh throne.

Con. This flafih of indignation, O ! my filter

Gleams for a moment o'er thy troubled mind;
But darkeR woe lhall .fortly close around thee.
I have a dreadful itory for thine ear.-

Riv. A dreadful story ! how can he be wrong'd,

Who publicly renounc'd his plighted faith,
Plighted a thousand times ?

Con. He never did:
He sent no meflage to renounce thy love.

Riv. What then was VALaMA ?

Con. An unhappy wretch,

The slave of gold; gain'd by the worst of men,
To work thine overtlrow.

Riv. Leave me to judge
Of my condition. Tell me what thou know'ft.

Con. I need not tell RIVINE why I flunn'd her,

Since DURs'c.N was her husband ; I have fled
The human race, diitraded in my mind,
With grief and ihame and anger; oft my foul

Refolv'l.

Refolv'd revenge on RONAN. By-and.by
Something would whisper that we were decciv'd ;
That noble RONAN' never could be base.
Perplex'd with thoughts like tliefe I rang'd the woods,
Andheeded not.the game my dogs purfu'd.
The form of yesterday furpriz'd me, I flray'd
Beyond my usual bounds; nor could I find,
Amidst the darkness of the driving blast,
A path to guide aright my doubtful steps.-.
As night came on, more furious grew the storm.
The thunder bellow'd and the lightning glanc'd
Along the dreary heath : before, behind,
And on each fide, the sudden torrents roar'd.
I wander'd on, and frequently I thought
The world without was like my troubled mind.
At last, far in the east, whence the wind blew,
I heard the howling of a (hepherd's dog;
With lighter steps, I turn'd me to the found
And heard it oft repeated. As I hop'd,.
It led me to a hut-I enter'd there;
And, by the embers of a fire of turf,
I saw a ghafly man firctch'd on a bed,
Of flicks and heath compos'd. Come near, he faidi
And litlen to the dying voice of VAL A.---

Riv. Of VALMA !

Con. VALMA, whom I had not leen

Since he, for Erin, with his mailer fail'd:
I found he did mistake me for his host,.
And silent listen'd with a beating heart.
Your charitable cares, he said; are vain;
My hour draws nigh.-Goodfhepherd, youhavelodg'd,.
Under your blameless roof, the basest wretch
That ever liv.'d on earth. My name is.VAL.ia,

The

The favour'd servant of the prince of Morven.
lIy matter sent me, from green Erin's shore,,
With tokens and a message to his love,.
Tlie fair RIVINE: but a tempers drove
My luckless vessel on the Pitifi' coast.
DURSTAN, the king, by promises and threats,.
Compell'd me to deceive the conltant maid,
And falsely to report, that my. brave lord
Renounc'd her love.-RIVINE, thou grow'ft pale !
Lean on my arm.-

Riv. No: I have strength enough !

Lead me, my brother ! lead.me to the'place
Where VALaIA is.

Con. At midnight he expir'd-
Riv. Would he had liv'd one other day for me i

0 ! I had much to ask him: did not RONAN,
With eyes of love behold the beauteous queen ?
So I have often heard, and that was told
Long before VALMIA came.-

Con. Ay, so it wa's

Contriv'd and told, on purpose to prepare
Thy mind, thus tainted, to receive the tale.
But know, for I explor'd the heart of VALMA,
The noble RONAN, in the hall of kings,
Who fought alliance with so brave a chief,
Fondly difplay'd-his passion for RIVINE.
With gems of thine he deck'd his conqu'ring arms,
And rais'd the song of beauty to thy praise 1
Such oltentation wither'd the desire
And kill'd the hope of every bluffling maid..
The hero comes, unaltered in his love,
And finds thee-

Riv. CONN.aN ! me he ihall not find !

We

We ne'er shall meet again-when does he come ?

Con. Be-like to-morrow, or perhaps to-day..

This is the appointed time, the-feafon meet
For enterprize of arms. Now the mild moon
Of autumn rifes when the fun descends,
And at the self-same hour, for many a night,
Lifts her fair head, to bless with light the world..
I mean to fliare the perils of my friend;
Nor fliall RIVINE as an hoflage go
Against her brother's and her RONAN'S sword.

Riv. Would that the swords of both were in my brcat !'

Ye winds, that I have wifll'd thould sleep for ever;
Ye southern winds ! from Etha's mountains blow,-
And waft to Elig's bay the Piaifh fleet !
I go to DURSTAN'S kingdom-

Con. Go, and perish !

Haft thou no rage, no indignation in thee ?
No generous drop in thy exhaustcd veins ?-
Art thou so tame, so vile, so base of foul,
To bear the fight of DURSTAN ? Crimes like his
Diifolve all ties. Betides his wrongs to thee,
He- murder'd VALMA on the lonely heath
Murder'd the traitor to conceal the trcafon.

Riv. Yes, I am base and vile ; my foul fulmits

To each opprobrious name from RONAN'S frieind
But I am not so tame: my heart is full
Of rage, of anger, and of mortal hatred !-

Con. To whom ?

Riv. To DURSTAN'3 wife.

Con. Renounce the name;

And thou may'st flill-Thy brother will defend,
And save thee from his power.

Riv. 0 ! save not me

From

From any misery ! But tell me rather,
How J may be more wretched than I am:
If thou can'it tell. Farewell my Pative land!
Ye woods and fireams of Elig's vale, farewell!
RIVINE leaves you vith a broken heart,
To waste her days in horror and despair,
With the detefRed author of her woes.
But welcome woe to me ! Fool that I was,
A wretch unworthy of a hero's love,
Who readily believ'd a lying tale,
Againfi the honour of the firfi of men:
Then in the cursed hour of jealous rage,
Gave up myself to misery and DURSTAN.

Enter MESSENGER.

Me/. The fleet so long expected, comes at last.

One lofty vessel far outfails the reft,
And bears the colours of the Pictifl king.

Con. 'Tis well [Exit Me:.] Bethink thee, sifter !

Riv. 'Tis too late !-

I should have thought before I wedded DURSTAN..
Now would'st thou have me flay till RONAN comes
'Tis not his anger, nor his hate I fear;
No, nor his scorn. My just desert is scorn;
But hide me, rocks and mountains, from his pity !
As the fond parent to the child relents,
When fore allidtion lays th' offender low;
So would his generous foul to pity melt,
Should he behold the ruins of RIVINE !
Come, PiAilh DURSTAN ! bear me from his fight,
To die unpitied in thy hated land !- [Exit.

Con. She's defperate-and what will RONAN be,
When, high in hope, he hears fhLe' loft.for ever ?

* Mi~~~~~~~~~hst

His words, his gestures I remember well,
When last we parted at the vessel's fide:
From his embrace I turn'd me to the ihore:
His arms he firetch'd, and caught my hand again;
He prest it to his breast, he wrung it hard;
And, with a look of infinite affetion,
CONNAN ! he said, my king commands; I go:
To thee, my friend, I leave my love in charge !
Fondly I promis'd to defend the maid.
What shall I answer when he claims his bride ?-
She must not go with DURSTAN. O ! my fire !
Thy wrath I fear, and not the PiAifh fivord!
But RONAN has my faith. Where is my page,
So swift of foot ? Thy mafler calls thee, CALMiAR.

Enter CALMAR.
Cal. What would my lord?

Con. Now, CALMAR, win my favour;

I have a message for the eagle's wing,
On the fiift pinions of the wind, to bear; .
Exert thy utmost speed !

Cal. Speak, and I fly;
Swift as the arrow from my matier's bow.-

Con. Here lies thy way: come on, and mark my

words.

[Exeunt.
End of the FIRST ACT.

A'CT

I .

# ACT II.

ACT II.
SCENE, The Palace of Katbul.

EURAN alone.

HAVE been sleeping on a hollow bank,
Above a flood unfathom'd.-- ! those slaves!

Who gave assurance of the death of VALMA ?
And boafled each that his good fiord difpatch'd him.
The blame as yet on DURSTAN only falls.
Would I had never join'd my hand to his,
Nor touch'd the proffer'd gold !-Oft have I heard,
And now at lafl believe, 'tis safer far
To deal deceitfully with crafty men,
Than practise art on unexperienc'd youth,
Whose passions sally out beyond conjecure,
And, by extravagance, confound the wife.
The paflions of this prince are like the wind:
The Pietifi name is odious to the tribes,
Whose hearts still sway to Albion's kindred race.
If CONNAN calls to arms, enrag'd they rife,
Like billows when the furious tempefi blows.-
The kings have met: how flall I warn the Pi&
Without alarming KATHUL ?-Here they come.

Enter KATIIUL, DURSTAN, andfeveral Pii/tJ Chiefs.,
Dur. Excuse my long involuntary absence !

Uncertain is his hour whose work is war,
Who takes his way across the changeful main,
EURAN, thou faithful servant of thy lord,
I greet thee well.

Eur.

Eur. With joyful heart, O King !
I fee thee in the wifl'd-for hour return.

Dur. Soon muRf I quit again this friendly (lore;

For I am doom'd to pass my life in arms.-
The wandering heir of Albion's vanquifh'd line,
Congallus, threatens to invade my kingdoms.
This on the seas I learn'd.

.Kath. I can confirm
The truth of that report.-

Dur. King of the Isles!

I'll give those bold invaders warlike welcome !
At eve, with favouring tide, I fail again.
The radiant moon, with all her splendour, (hines
To light my vessel thro' the wat'ry way.
Impart my purpose to .thy beauteous daughter,
And tell the urgent cause.

Kath. -Urgent, indeed;

Unwilling as we are so loon to lore thee;
Tidings like these admit of no delay.
But let us spread the feast and raise the song,
Whilst yet thy steps are here. Sweet to the ear
Is melody, and pleasant to the foul
The tale of battles fought and woes endur'd,
By chiefs, who long have ceas'd from war and woe.
We in our turn, 0 King! hall pals away,
And in the song be found.-

Eur. The Queen draws near.

Enter RIVINE. [KATHUL advances towards her.
Eur. [To Durltan.] Stay not the feast, there's dan-

ger in the hall;
Demand thy queen; her brother knows too much.

Kath.-Now, as becomes thee, meet thy hufband'slove,

C And

And look complacent on tho Pitilh chiefs;
Through many dangers they have reach'd the ilhore.

Dur. Cold is my welcome ! slowly she approaches,

Silent and fad, six'd on the earth her eyes.
With such relucance, such averted looks,
In bitterness of foul, a captive comes
Before the conqueror, whose hands are red
With her dear kindred's blodd.

Rio. King of the PiEs,

Thou read'ft my thoughts aright, within thy brcaft
Dwells an interpreter that cannot err.-

Dur. To these injurious words, I know not, Queen !

What answer best belongs. Thy gloomy mind
Some foul suspicion of thy husband slains,
Changing to hatred and to harfl disdain,
That melancholy and that cold reserve,
Which I regretted once. Unfold thy thoughts!
And lhew the viper that has Rung thy foul.
She heeds me not. Ha ! wherefore dolf thou tremble,
And stare so wildly on a firanger's face ?
Riv. [To one of the Pis.] Permit me, firanger, to be-

hold that fvord
Tlruf it, I pray, one moment tomy hand.

[The PiEt gives thefviord.

It is, it is his sword. I-know it well,
Thlis jewel once wrs mine !

Kna.t. V'Kiat means my daughter ?

Riv. Behold the sword of RONAN. 0 ' my father I

Too certain sign the hero lives i'o more.
Is this thy nuptial present, cruel king
But I accept it, for it suits our love.

D!r. Not in the hearing of these gallant chiefs,
Whom I would wiih to hold thee high in honour,

Will

Will I reply to passion. Thou haft nam'd
The owner of the sword. His it may be';-
But swhofe it was, I never knew before.

Riv. Thou can'il no more deceive me. The long train

Of treachery and lies, the murder too
Has been detected. Miserable VALMA
Liv'd only to reveal it.-Now thou com'ft,
With this proud trophy of thy work complete.
O ! thou sole relique of the first of men!
Signal of death ! memorial of the brave !
Companion of my woes, perhaps the end !
Why didit thou thirit, O ! DURSTAN, for his blood !
Had'it thou not wrong'd him, was not that enough ?
But thou didit wifely, to consult thy safety;
For conscience toldthee, whilst the warrior liv'd,.
The robber was not safe.

Dur. Thy words are madness
If I had kill'd him, was he not my foe ?

Riv. How did the hero fall ?-By fraud he fell!

For he was fill invincible in arms,
Alone a match for many in the field.

Dur. That sword, the fight of which disturbs thy foul,

Is not the trophy of a hero slain
In evil hour I found it.

Riv. Found it ! where ?
Was not its owner near ?

Dur. If he was near,

Thou haft conjectur'd right, lie lives no more:
For where I found it, death and horror rei^n'd.

Riv. Now, I believe thee, DURSTAN ! Tell me: Pit !

I-ow, wvhen, without a mafl.er too thou foutnd'il
H-is fworil who never yet was fiil'd in arms ?

Du)r. As in our way to thee we crofs'd those s-is,

'C 2 ..Whose

Whose rage scarce summer tames, a tempest rose,
A dreadful one, as ever swept the main.
All night we labour'd in the jaw's of death,
But, when the morning dawn'd, the tempest ceas'd;
Red, on the troubled deep, the fun arose,
And shew'd a dismal objec to our eyes;
FafR, on a ridge of rocks, a wreck appear'd,
Which feem'd the ruin of a noble vessel;
Near as our safety would permit we fail'd,
And view'd the fate, which might have been our own.-
The ship was broken by the heavy seas,
Parted in two; and all about the rocks
Dead bodies floated on the toffing waves.

Riv. Was there n3 living creature ?

Dur. No, not one.

Low are the rocks; their ragged tops are seen,
And barely seen above the fmoothefll ea;
But in a form their place is known afar,
By the white waves, that rage, and swell, and break
Like mountains o'er them; there no man could live.
Who'er aboard that luckless vessel fail'd,
Embrac'd the fame inevitable doom.-

Riv. Was the sword there ?

Dur. It was. About to leave

The wreck, we fought ofme token of the dead -
By which they might be known, that sword was spied-,;
Caught in the cordage of a malt it hung
And glitter'd through the water.-

Riv. 'Tis enough!

If at my feet his breathless body lay,
I could not be more certain of his fate.
In those wild waves the chief of warriors died;
To- me he hasten'd through the seas and florms;

Unknowing

Unknowing of his wrongs, for me he died.

Kath. Forbear, my daughter ! for my fake forbear!
Dur. And for thine own, 0 Queen ! refpe&a thyself.
Riv. I will. For ever I renounce thee, DURSTAN i

To RONAN'S memory I devote my days!
Few are the days that of my life remain.
Hear me, amaz'd fpeclators! ye who think
RIVINE has forgot her sex's flame ;
And judge me with more juflice. In my hand
I hold the sword of RONAN. Who he was,
And of what high renown, is not unknown;
For thro' the kingdoms of the North his name
Flew on the wings of Fame.-His love to me
And mine to him, for I avow my love,
My fire approv'd.-To him I was betrcth'd;
But, in his absence, DURSTAN did seduce
A faithless servant to betray his mailer.
fie fram'd a message from the noble RONAN,
Rejecing me, and setting free my faith;
Then urg'd a fond exasperated maid,
And with the helo of her deceived father,.
Precipitated her difprder'd mind
To yield a rash confeit.-''hat was my crime,.
\VWhich I deny not; nor refuse to bear
Miy uynifiment, which, like my crime, is great.
Despair consumes me ! vither'd like the leaf
Of autumn is my beauty. Now I iland'.
On the dim threshold of the house of darkness;
Remorse pursues RIvINE to the tomb.

Dur. Who with a woman's frenzy can contend ?

Thou halt ayow'd thy hatred to thy huiband,
And to another own'd thy guilty love
For loss of him thou rav'fl-

C 3 Enter

Enter MESSENGER.

Mlfef King of the Ifes!

On Mora's top the fiery signal burns.
I saw a troop, in shining steel array'd,
Descend the hill, by active CALMIAR led.

Kath. Whose hand presumes to light the warning fire

That never burns in peace ? Where is my son ?
The feet of CALMAR fly at his command.

Ml. To war they fly. On the high-pointed rock.

That runs into the bay, CONNAN himself
- Stands like a tow'r. His angry voice he-fends
Along the roaring waves, and flakes his spear
Against the Piss approaching to the shore.-

Dur. I am betray'd.

Sibth. Of me diftruitful too

Dur. The son my enemy, I dread the fire.
Ily brave companions, whose renown in arms,
RoTe on the ruins of a greater foe
Than CONNAN is, or those who fwvell his pride,
Now let your valour shine. At bay we stand,
But not like timid deer.

js PiR. Our lives are thine:
With thee we conquer, or with thee we fall.-

Kath. Some angry spirit hovers in the air,

And scatters rage and fury. Hear me, Pit !
Suspicion argues oft a guilty mind';
A noble. spirit never. Sheath your fwvords!
I am your guard in Elig. To the fiore
I go to quell the tumult, and receive
Thy people as my friends.-My daughter ! hear
Thy father's counsel. Never was a child
To a fond parent dearer. 0 ! RIVINE !
Much of my hope is loft; but do not thou,

In

In rash resentment, throw the reft away,
Think who thou art ! the daughter of a king,
And of a king the wife ! the pledge of peace-
Among the nations ;, be not thou the cause
Of war and mortal firife ! thy name hlall go.
To future times for good, or ill-renown'd,
The curse or blessing of thy native land,
And of thy father's house. My child be wife !
Forget the past, which cannot be recall'd;
And arm thyself with patience.-

[Exit KATHUL and EURAN.
Dur. Sweet the voice

Of those that counsel peace. Rage was not made
Nor laiting anger for a gentle breast.
Miy foul is innocent of RONAN's fate ;
And if I used some art againfl a rival,
Ascribe it only to excess of love.-

TWife are thy father's words. Forget the past,
And be hereafter happy.-

Riv. Leave me, PiCt!

I hate the present; I abhor the past !
The time to come, DURSTAN, is not for me;
I haften to the tomb ! There I shall find
Forgetfulness. 0 leave me to my sorrows !
Leave me to die here in my native land,
Where once with.-peace and innocence I liv'd
(Companions whom my foul fiall know no more).
Till thou camlft hither. Thou haft made me wretched
Beyond all utterance, example,. thought,
Or stretch of fancy. When the mournful.bard.
Seeks a fad subjeE for the midnight song,
He shall rejeEt the woes of other times,
And choose RIVINE for the tale of tears.

Dur.

Dur. Forbear such fond complaints, and henceforth,

Queen,
Think of the duty which thy state requires.-

Riv. 'Tis my chief duty to renounce that slate,
And thee, for ever. (Going.)

Dinr. Hence thou mufl not go.
I will not trutt thee to thy own disposal.-

Riv. Am I a captive ?

Dur. No, nor art thou free

To cafl thy husband off. Foul shame it were
For me to susser such contempt from thee.
Willing or not, forthwith thou must embark 3
Thy prudent father yielded his content;
Be thou persuaded ra her than compell'd.

Riv. I nlall be neither ; my deliverer comes !

Enter CONNAN.
Con. Unhand my filer ! elle-

Dur. Thou guard'fl thyself
Ey mixing with thy threats a name of safety.

Con. My farfely, Pie, depends not on thy will.
Behold my force, to thine superior far.--

[CALMAR c)pears, wtilh the warriors of CONN:AN,

But fair and equal, man to man, I meet thee,
I use no yile deceitful arts like thee.
I take no base advantage of a foe.-

Dur. Am I thy foe ?

Con. Hafl thou not wrong'd my friend ?
And loft thou a.k if CONNAN be thy foe ?

Riv. Alas, the fiiend of CoNNAN lives no more !
Behold !

Con. 'Tis RONANS sword; with life and this
At once the hero parted. Ah ! my filer !

How

How came it hither ?

RZv. DURSTAN !

Con. Ha ! the spoils

Of RONAN by'his foe in triumph borne !
No tears I lied: red are thy drops, revenge!
DURSTAN, call up thy courage; rear thy crest,
And to a bold defiance, boldly answer.
I charge thee first with treachery and falsehood,
Crimes that strike down the warrior's gallant plumes y
With murder next, for wretched VALMIA'S death
For RONAN larft for RONAN, basely slain
By hands like thine, he could not else have fallen.
With. mortal hate I call thee to the combat.

Riv. My Brother, hear me ! Not by DURSTAN'S hand',

Nor by the arm of man, did RONAN fall;
Far from the shore, amidst the stormy waves,
Amongat the cordage of a vessel wreck'd
The sword was found.-Forgiven be my wrongs,
And to his kingdom let the Pi& return.

Diur. Great is thy clemency ! Permit the Pit,

Injur'd, defy'd, difhonour'd, to be gone.-
Is DURSTAN'S name of such account in Elig ?
Are these. the terms on. which he quits the field ?
CONNAN, thy challenge and thy wrath I scorn;
Thy siser, as my queen, I justly claimr:
If she's with-held, I shall lay wafle your Isles,
And to my kingdoms add one sceptre more.

Con. If rlie desires to pass her days with thee,:

She is not worth the splinter of a spear.
But if her foul reveres her lover's shade,.
And flies from thee to solitude and sorrow,
Mly sword from insult shall the mourner guard.-
Thy threats I laugh at ; thou unwarlike king.

T,

To boast of conquetl and refuse the combat.
Wilt thou not fight, thou chief without a foul ?
Then lly without delay. Now make thy choice;
Begone or draw thy sword !

Din. Vain-glorious youth!

Thou fit companion of the boaster RONAN,
Whom I could wvih this moment in thy place !
I'll seek the king. If he denies me jutlice,
Unw-orthy as thou art of DURSTAN's sword,
Elxpcef me soon.

Con. Thou wilt not come so soon
As CONNsN wiflles.- [Exit DURSTAN and :Pi&s.

RiJ. Why this fitrife for me ?

Who should be shunn'd like the infectious blast,
Which, where it talkes, deflroys. RONAN is dead,
Let not the friend of RONAN fall for me.
I have a refuge lure. Behold yon cliff,
Whole fummlit, jutting o'er its wave-worn base,
Darkens the deep below.

Con. Fly from despair!

And seek the lielter of thy brother's love,-
The friend of Rox.,: 'vill prote& RIrINs.
If the pale ghoil that d-wells *mldtl the storm
Retains th' afection: of its iormer flatc,
O'er us the ghost of RONAN .hall rejoice.-
To Elig's towers thou mufi not now return.
Come on ; I'll lodge thee in a place of iafety,
The cave of fad ORCLLAN: now the tide,
Retiring, leaves a pafiage cross the bay.-

Riv. Go to the all of Ellg. Tellthe maid (to CALIMAX..

Omazia to give out that there I rell,
And watch as if (he guarded my repose. [Exeunt.

End of the$ SECOND ACT.

ACT

# ACT III.

ACT HI.
SCENE, a Cli on the Sea-jiore, with a

Cave.

RIVINE and ORELLAN.
Oldc. > EHOLD the habitation of ORELLAN !

For threescore years and ten this rock has

been

My dwelling place and here I fit in sorrow,
Silent and motionless from morn to eve
'Till the sea fowl, that skim along the fllore,
Fearless alight, and, fitting at my feet,
Scream their wild notes, as if I was a fione
Or fenfefefs trunk, that could not do them harm.-
It was not always thus; I was not born
To misery; nor in the wild woods bred
Of savage race ; fair was my morn of youth !
With tly brave grandsire I was train'd to arms,
His chosen warrior, and his truiled friend.
But love and jealousy furpriz'd my foul,
Drove me from men, and blotted out my name.
This arm flew Namora.

Riv. Father, forgive

My importunity ! Vouchsafe to tell
What I in part have heard.

Orel. My flory's old,

Thy sorrow recent: but to hear my woes
Will teach thee patience. Such as thou art now,
Or as thou waft, e'er grief had made thee wan,

Nnnora

Namora was. Like thine, her beauty charm'd
Contending princes; but the gen'rous maid
Preferr'd to princes fond ORELLAN'S love.
Daily we met in woods, in groves, in glades,
Remote and secret. One unhappy time,
Returning from the chace, I fought the grove.
Ent'ring, I saw Namora; her white arms
Embrac'd a youth; her lips were join'd to his.
My bow was in my hand; I bent it soon,
And pierc'd them with one arrow. Ere 1 reach'd
The spot on which they fell, Namora's eyes
Were clos'd for ever. The expiring youth
Was her brave brother, to his native shore
That day return'd. His fiter's iteps he trac'd,
To perish in her arms. I kneel'd me down,
And begg'd the warrior, if he yet had strength,
To give me death. He heard me not; he died,
And left me living.-This bleak cave I chose,
My everlasting mansion. In those days
The hollow shore resounded with my cries.
Often the hunter hasten'd from the hill,
And oft the mariner fteer'd from the deep,
And wonder'd at me. Time, that rage subdued
To milder grief. My tears incessant flow'd
Like waters from the rock. Here have I mourn'd
An age of man complete. Alike to me
Summer and winter, autumn and the spring,
And night and day the fame.-

Riv. Thus would I wilh

To waste my days, a fpetacle of woe !
Without or change or interval. I feel
Within myself a source and spring of sorrow,
That ne'er will cease to flow, 'tilldeath flall stop it.

Surely

Surely the spirits' of the dead delight
To be remember'd, and lamented, father.

Ore/. Daughter, they do-my own experience tells.-
Once every year, that day Namora died,
A wondrous viron comes. In the still air
(For not a breath then stirs the ill2nt bay)
Are heard the saddest, yet the fveetell founds,
That ever touch'd the ear or heart of man,
The melody of woe.-Then from the fides
Descend the fladows of the murder'd pair,
Pale as the colours of the lunar bow. .
Hov'ring before the cavern's mouth they spread
Their arms; they fix on me their pitying eyes,
And with a shriek, they vaniflx into air:
Does hoar tradition tell a tale like this ?
Was ever mortal destiny like mine ?

Riv. Could I but hope to fee my love arise,
rAnd look on me with pity, I would live
In the vafl ocean on a rock alone.
But RONAN'S injur'd ghost detests RVINE.--
In the dark world of spirits thou fialt join
Thy dear Namora's ihade 3 but far from mine
The angry spirit of my love will fly.-

Ore/. I have another charge besides thee,-daughter!

Within my cave a wretched firanger lies,
Who tafted all the bitterness of deah ;
But scarce yet knows his wonderful escape.

Riv. Escape from what ?

Ore/. From flipwreck in the storm
That raged last night upon the rocky (hore.

Riv. From fnipwvreck! ha ! Is he a man in years,
Or of the youthful time ?

Orel. In prime of youth,
D And

And beautiful he feem'd, tho' in the arms
Of death upon the naked beach he lay.
I found him there. Attentive I perceiv'd
That the warm life was not wholly fled.
I call'd a shepherd swain to give me help,
Who from a neighbouring hill furvey'd the deep.
He came, and willing in his arms he bore
The youth insensible ; lihe brought him hither.
Within he lies, fretch'd on the ikins of deers
A sleep profound has seiz'd him; when he wakes
He will not know, if in a friendly place,
Or in the dwelling of his foes he lies.-
I'll go-

Rlv. Not yet a while.

Orel. Thy colour lhifts

From pale to red, from red to pale again.
What dost thou hope or fear ?

Riv. A firange event

Yet, like the fate and fortune of my life.
Wild and incredible. Perhaps this youth,
Sav'd from the wreck, and sleeping in thy cell,
:RONAN.

Orel. No; delusive are thy hopes 3

The various vest and floating robe I know
-() Albion's warlike race. He wrore not those.

iis dress is splendid, bright with foreign gold,
And m.rks the chieftain of a distant land.

Ri¢v. Enter, and if he sleeps, to me return,

I will behold and bless him lwhre he lies;
Then from his presence fly, if it is RONAN.

Orel. I hear a noise within; the flranger comes
His iteps found on the rock.

Riv. Now, now my heart

Thy

Thy moment this. [RIVIN rtetires to the fidcfcene.
[ 7Ihef ranger from the inner part ofthe cavefees ORELLAN.

Stran. Thou venerable man,

Prefcrver of my life ! for so methinks
I ought to call thee: tell me on what fllore
The waves have throvn me ? For the place imports
Almost as much as life.

Riv. 'Tis he ! 'Tis RONAN !

Ron. RIVINE'S voice ! I am where I would wish;
I\Iy love is here !

Rzv. Thy love ! approach me not!

Thou noble youth ! nor call RIVINE thine.
Ron. Not call thee mine !

Rivt. No, never, never more !

I am unworthy of thy least regard ;
Unworthy of the air that RONAN breathes.
When thou fhlalt know what cannot be con ccal'd,
Thou must abhor me.

Ron. I abhor RlVNE !

Ah ! thou art chang'd indeed since I beheld thee !
Anguith gleams in thy eye, and wild despair
Contends with flame.-RIVINE, speak and save me
From horrible conje&ures.

Riv. Spare a wretch,

Wkhofe heart is breaking ! Fain, fain wou'd I speak,
And tell thee how RIVINE was betray'd.

Ron. Betray'd ! to what betray'd ?

Riv. Will not the rock

Fall down and cover with a heap my shame.
Follow me not ! this hoary fire will tell
My crim e; my misery cannot be told !

[Runs into the cave.
Ron. It must be so. Thou confident of guilt,

D 2 Perhaps

Perhaps the counsellor !

Orel. Young man ! attend

To every circumfiance of this misfortune,
And thou wilt pity her whom once thou lov'd'ft.

Ron. Tell me one circumfiance; I al. no more ;
Is flie not wedded ?

Ore!. Liften to my words,
And thou flalt have an answer to thy question.

Ron. I have no patience for a tedious tale:

.Answer at once: is flie not wedded, fay ?
Then I may hear thy flory.

Orel. It were better,.

Better for thee, rash youth ! to let me tell
How this difatler dil o'ertake thy love.-

Ron. Wilt thou not fay i;'hat the disaster is?
How tedious, hard, and obstinate is age !

Orel. Unless I ihould deceive thee to thy hurt,
I can no longer hidz from thee the truth.

Eon. Then she is wedded ?

Ore. Yes.

Ron. Dost thou fay yes?

OreL. Unwillingly I speak the painful truth
My foul is griev'd for thee.

Ron. Thou art the cause

Of what I susser. Thy officious hand
Sav'd me from death, to make me perifhl worse.
My latest thought, when finking in the storm,
Was.of RiVINE ; of her love, her truth,
IHer grief eternal for her RONAN loft.-
And now I find her in another's arms;
Of me regardless, though my faithful heart,
Full of her image, for her fake defpid'd
The beauteous queen of Erin's warlike land.

OreL.

Orel. Young man ! thou wrong'fl RIVINE.-

Ron. Wou'd that thou,

Who fay'ft I wrong her, were a young man too,
And strong and valiant to defend her cause !
Let me behold the traitress, and confiond
Her guilty foul.-

Orel. Go, give thy passion way,.

Pursue and seize her in thy frantic arms;
Then throw her headlong from the airy cliff!
I kill'd the maid I lov'd; I thought her false,
But she was truth itself

Ron. And wedded too ?

But who is he that durst invade my right ?
What is his name ? She fays file was betray'd.
Who of mankind is-he ?

Orel. Her husband!

Ron. Oh !
Orel. The PiAifli king. -

Ron. DURSTAN, my mortal foe !

The curRf oppressor of my native land !
From all mankind has she fele&ed him,
Whom most my foul abhorr'd ?

Ore!. She never chose:

She was betray'd, deluded, and compell'd.
Thy servant Valma, gain'd by DURSTAN'S gold,
Deliver'd to RIVINE a false message;
Cold and contemptuous, full of flight excuse,
For breach of faith confeft, and worst of all
Fraught with the praises of the beauteous queen,
Whose love had made thee lord of Erin's land.

Ron. Could file believe him ?

Ore/. The bold traitor swore
That he was witness to the proud espousals.

D 3 Ro,.

Ron. 0 ! villain ! villain ! Did ile credit this ?
Orel. How could {he doubt it ?

Ron. Ha ! did fle not know ne ?

Did not each acion of my life belie.
The monstrous tale ?

Ore/. Long before that, the Illes

Resounded with the fame of thy great ads
In Erin's wars perform'd and rumour spread
Abroad the story of the grateful queen.

Ron. Where was my friend ?

Orel. Whlen DuRSTAs,came to Elig,

CONNAN was absent in the distant isles;
His faith to thee this day of danger proves.

Ron. This day

Orel. The fraud of Du.USTAN was deteced,

And from presumption firong thy death believ'd;
RIVINE, who till then conceal'd her anguish,
And veil'd with sickly fniles her broken heart,
Then owa'd her love and publili'd her despair.
With threats the PiEt requires his wedded wife:
CONNAN defies him, and demands the combat.

Rcn. I knew he vou'd ; my brave, my faithful friend:
But mine the cause, and mine shall be the combat.

Orel. The tribes are up in arms; for itrong's the hco
That haughty DURSTAN leads.

Ron. I have no arms,
The deep, hath fwvallowed up my fvord and field.

lrel. Here is a sword.

Ron.- A fivordJ! It is my own.

Never more welcome to thy master's hand.
I'll trust thy temper tried. This on the shore
Did'It thou not find ?

Crcl. RIVINE brought it lither,,

And

And bath'd it with her tears.--

Ron. Did flie, RIVINE ?

Of her I must not think while DURSTAN lives
Father, farewell.--

Enter RIVINr.

Riv. Yet flay and hear me, RONAN;

Behold RIVINE, prostrate at thy feet 1
I know I never muff behold thee more i
And from that certainty derive the boldness
To offer to thine ear my last request..
When I am dead, as I fllall flortly be,
Think not too hardly of me. By the ghosts-
And spirits of the air that wait for me,
I never ceased to love thee. My fond heart,
Ev'n when I thought thee false, and firove to hate thee,
Ev'n then my tortur'd heart was full of thee;
'Tis this that fends me to an early grave ;
I could not bear to be and not be thine.--
O RONAN ! RONAN ! when in dufl I lie,
And thou art wedded to some lovely maidi
Worthy of thee, unlike the raflh RIVINE
Then let thine anger cease ! my fleeting ghost,
For ever near thee, liall some pleasure know.

Ron. May DURSTAN'S jav'lin nail me to the ground,
And may my dying eyes behold thee borne
Aboard his vefrel, if I do not love thee !
Then of my pity judge.-

Riv. Thou giv'ft too much.

FirIt let the earth receive my lifeless clay,
Before thou pitieft me. My fate is six'd,
The place is chosen where my tomb flall rife:
A little hillock in the narrow plain,

Beside

Betide the rock, fast by the water-fall,
Where in my better days we oft have met.
Shun not the place which thou waft wont to love ;.
But come alone, come when the'mourner's voice
For me hath ceas'd and silent is the vale
Then if thy foul is willing to be fad,
Look on my grave.

Ron. Thy grave ! thou shalt not die.

My foul is in my voice; forgive thyself,
What RONAN has forgiven. Speak not of death:
Let me not hear thee utter such a found,
Unless thou mean'ft to fend me to the field
Subdu'd by thee, difhearten'd and unman'd,
An easy prey to some inglorious arm,
The conquest of a coward. Doff thou hear,
And not reply to this ? No, not one word !
But fullen silence, and a down-cast eye.
Thy will shall be obey'd: when I am slain-
Within thy deflin'd grave let me be laid,
If the stern umpire of thy fate and mine
Permit so much, and thou dost not disdain
To rcei beside the vicim of thy pride.-

Riv. To what a narrow ridge thou driv'ft RIVINE

A dreadful precipice on either hand !
And I can only chute which way to fall.
I've wrong'd thee much; let me not wrong thee more,
Nor come a dark eclipse across thy fame.
Go Vhere thy valour bids; go in full strength
And confidence let not a fear for me
Unnerve thy mighty arm. I will endure
The load of life ; embrace all fiame and forrov;
Rather than thou should'st bow thy noble head
Beneath the sword of an insulting foe.-

psN;

Rwo. Now I am firong! !-

Ore/. A nimble foot descends
The winding path.-

Riv. 'Tis CALMAR'S airy gait.

Enter CALMAR.
Ca/. I come in hafle to warn- [Jees RONAN,.

Ron. Be not afraid!
Believe thine eyes; the friend. of CONNAN lives.

Ca. Friend of my malter's foul, for whom he mourns,.

0 prince of Morven ! like the morning beam
Thou com'it to chace the heavy night of woe
That darkens. CONNAN ; haften to his aid i
Many the foes whom he for thee defies..

Ron. Where is thy lord !

Cal. On the wood-kgirted lawn.-

Beyond the hill of pines his warriors fland
The Picillh army covers all the fiore.-
I saw our aged king tear his grey locks,
As he implor'd them to forbear the fight.-

Ron. Shame to my foul! why do I tarry here ?
Farewell! farewell! RIVINE ! [Exit.

Riv. To tile field

Rejoicing in his might the hero goes,
And so he should ; from me he. parted well.-
I fee, I fee the path that I mult follow,
Bright as the starry way that flhines above,.
When the blue frost is beautiful in heav'n.
Thy tidings, CALMAR ?

Cal. Your retreat is known .

Riv. To DURSTAN ?

Cal. No; but to your troubled fire,
Who, partial to the Pifl, his daughter blames..

CONNAN

CONNAN entreats you to forsake this place,
And seek the ihelter of the inland vale.
I am your guide and guard.

Riv. I'll leave this p'ace,
And thou flalt be my guide. Father, farewell !

[To ORELLAN,

The joy that dwells with tender grief be thine,
To me, alas ! denied.-No pleasant ray
Can ever reach the dark abode of thame.
One issue yet is left.-

Ore!. I read thy thoughts,

Hadst thou been silent I had known thy purpose.
Thy port exalted, thine enlighten'd eye,
Denote the pitch of-thy deterrnin'd mind ;
The ftorm-tofs'd vefifel seeks a shore unknown.
I blame thee not, O ! daughter of afflition.
Strange is thy delliny ! thyself alone
Can be thy counselor. -

· Riv. Afflition's friend !

Devoted vassal of eternal sorrow,
Thanks for thy gentle sympathy, if thou
Should'fl give a tear to me or my fad flory,
Namora's memory wou'd not be wrcng'd.

[Exci RIVINE and CALIMAR.
Orel. Bright liar! that haltes to set. 0 child of

youth,

Like the green oak, before its head is bare,
Untimely torn from rome high mountain's brow.
So shalt thou fall, but not without thy praise.
This cave, a while the mansion of thy woes,
Those hoary cliffs, and yon resounding bay,
Shall often echo thy lamented name.
My voice Ihall pierce the flillnefs of the morning,

And

# ACT IV.

And evening's milder calm, bewailing thee.
Namora's gentle fliade will love the song
That joins her fifter-memory to thine.-

End of the TIIRD ACT.

ACT IV.

SCENE, a Thick Wood.

Enter KATHUL and CONNAN.
Con. 7/ Y friend is dead. But friendfiip never dies.

M.V1 Remember, Sir, how RoNANfought'for me.

The youth were met in the fequefter'd vale,
And held a feast of joy. The bards arose,
And sung heroic deeds atchiev'd -of old.
Rous'd with thef ong, the chiefs began to boast
Their own exploits in arms. Above the reft
Proud Armor vaunted, trusting in his Itrength;
Truth lie regarded not; he told how once,
In Ardven's vale, he.met the blue-ey'd maid,.
Old Alpine's daughter ; CONNAN was her guard,
Vhlho fiunn'd the combat, and refign'd the maid.
Silent and pale my fad companions heard;
Eut from the banquet, gen'rous RONAN rose,
And dar'd the giant to maintain his words,
By combat on the plain. Furious they met,
Like two firong bulls contending for the herd;
They fought from mid-day, 'till the setting fun
Gilded the vale; then RONAN's arm prevail'd,
And Armor bit the ground. Fast by the lake,

Mark'd

Mark'd with a flone, is seen his lengthen'd grave ;
Eternal monument of RONAN'S faith
And of his glory; but of Ihame to me,
If e'er my. foul forgets the hero's love.

Kath. Ha! who comes yonder rushing from the wood,

Swift as the roe ? fe(at one bound he leaps
From bank to bank the brook. CONNAN, beware !
His ready weapon glitters in his hand.

Con. Spirits of earth and air ! 'tis RONAN'S form.

Thus have I seen him haften to the field,
Thus spring exulting when the foe drew near.

Kath. Oft have I heard the voice of mournful ghofLs,

Borne on the wings of the careering winds,
But ne'er till now beheld-It flops and glares
With angry eyes on me. Speak thou, my son'
For ye were one.

Enter RONAN.

Con. 0 spirit of my friend !
Com'f thou to urge thy CONNAN to revenge ?

Ron. I am no spirit: come, my faithful friend,

And in my arms feel that thy RONAN lives.
Now art thou fatisfy'd -- [They embrace.

Con. I am transported !

RONAN to life reftor'd and at my fide,
When in despair against his foes I arm'd !
I have a thousand questions, but not now.
I must be sudden and abrupt, my friend !
The times are so.-Sad tidings thou must hear.
But let resentment chace thy grief away:
The salve of sorrow isa brave revenge.

Ron. I come to seek revenge; my wrongs I know,
For I have seen RIVINE. Where is DURSTAN ?

I

I hop'd to meet him in the battle's front;
But peace is here.

Kath. No, prince of Morven, no!

Peace dwells not here. Between the swords I came
Of raging warriors, and obtain'd a truce
Until to-morrosv's dawn. Altho'*my hope
Of reconcilement at thy pretence fades,
My troubled foul rejoices in thy safety.
Thy timeless death I mourn'd.

Ron. King of the Isles
Why didftthou give thy daughter to the Pit ?

Kath. RONAN, x was deceiv'd. I hold thee dear,
And witih-But nothing can recall the past.-

Ron. Recall the pall !

Con. RONAN !

Ron. Be not alarm'd !

0 ! King! thou art the father of my friend,
The father of my lov'd my -loft RIVINE.
And that restrains my tongue. Yet I mull fay,
Hadit thou been constant to thy old allies,
Hadst thou been faithful, and .preferv'd my bride,
This day had crown'd thy hoary head with joy.
Impatient to behold my love, I fail'd
And left behind the Scandinavian fleet
Of warriors full. With these, Icrne's sons'
And Erin's chiefs, for injur'd Albion arm'
Selma shall rife again.

Kath. May Selma rife,

And Albion's honour'd race for ever reign.
Yet hear me, RONAN; from my heart I speak;
Thou bear'ft a noble mind; thy fame is great
For justice as for valour with the Pit

E Thou

Thou haft a rightful quarrel; but refpe&
This hospitable fliore; contend hot here,
Nor fight with DURSTAN for his wedded wife.

Ron. Not fight with DURSTAN ! then let DURSTAN fly,

And I ihall follow to whatever shore
He takes his flight;

Kath. I underltand thee well.-

My son do thou regard thy filer's fame !
A fairer afpe& much her condua wore,
When thy lov'd friend was number'd with the dead,
Than now, when he in arms her husband braves.-
I go to meet the antients of the land,
The hoary counsellors, who can compare
The present trouble with the times of old,
And call experience to vouch their counsel.
Under the spreading beech, that shades the brook,
They fit and ruminate. [Exit.

Ron. Their thoughts I know.

Cold are the counsels of inafive age,
Patient of injury, averse to arms.
I long for vengeance, and my foul is sick
Of this delay. But why lhould I defer
My just revenge ? no truce was made for me;
I'll fend him a defiance.-

Con. Not to-day,

Nor yet to-morrow, do I wish the Pie
By RoNAN's hand to fall.-

Ron. If he should fall

By any other hand, I'm not reveng'd.
We're interrupted. Ha ! what man is that,
Who fleps so haughtily before the reft?

Con. It is the PiA.-

Ron. I thought so.

Con.
,J .

Con. Yet be calm!

Your eyes flash fire ; your heart beats in your breast
As it would burst your bosom.

Ron. Mark me, CONNAN !

This hour let my own spirit guide itself.
lie knows me riot. Beware of naming me,
i'll take my time to speak. [Walks aside.

Enter DURSTAN attended.

Dur. I fought the king-

But thou, who halt ufurp'd thy father's power,
May in his absence anfwcr.-

Con. What's thy question ?

Dur. A plain one, Whither was the velTel bound,
That left the ihore julf now with crouded fails ?

Con. I know not what fie is, nor whither bound.
Why dolt thou aik of me ?

Dut. I do fufpel,

She is difpatch'd to summon to your aid,
The warriors of the isles.

Con. Perhaps she is i

Credit thy wort suspicion; break the truce,
And I will thank thee. I desired no truce,
And never will have cordial peace with thee.

Dur. My faith, young man, is plighted to thy father,

And he flall own, to vindicate my fame,
That DURSTAN fought not to lay waste his ifes,
Nor flay his people.-

Con. If thou art sincere,

And tender of the lives of blameless men,
With me decide the quarrel; fllould I fall,
RivrNE's dowry is a kingdom then.

Di:r. Not that I fear thine arm, do Idecline

E2 z To

To answer thy proud challenge; but thou art
The brother of RIVINE

Ron. Wife thy words,

And just the reason thou affign'ft, 0 ! King!
But I am not the brother of RIVINE
And I accuse thee; I defy thee too!

Dur. Thou! who art thou!
Ron. Not less in blood and birth

Than DURSTAN is ; of royal lineage born,
To RONAN near allied. Ha ! dolt thou ltart
And tremble, Pit, at injur'd RONAN'S name ?

Dur. .Boaster, I know no fear; but thee I scorn.

Who vaunts his lineage and conceals his name,
Is. of his race the Rain.

Ron. Soon lhalt thou know,

Perhaps, somewhat too. soon, the name I bear
But, first, I'll tell thee thy detested deeds,
And.gall, if pofible, thine iron heart.-
Unlike a prince, a warrior and a man,
Meanly thou didit seduce a servile foul:
To wrong his master's honour and his love;
And by the blackest artifice betray'd
To endless misery, a royal fair,
Who dies of grief and hate to-the-affaffin,!:
And lill thou dost presume-.

Dur. Away! begone!

Ron- I will not; nor (halt thou, from RONAN go.-
Dur. Thou, RONAN !

Ron. I ! now, robber, dost thou tremble ?

Unlheath thy sword ! Each moment teems an age-
'Till I avenge on thee my mighty wrongs,
And give thy spirit to the winds of heav'n.

Diir. So confident! Behold this sword I draw,

'Tis-

'Tis ftain'd with blood of Albion's vanquilh'd kings,
To RONAN near allied; I lift it now
To fend thee to thy fathers.-

Ron. Take my answer.-[ They engage.
ift Pia. [Interpojng] Let kings with kings contend,.

and fubjeds meet
A subje&'s arm -

Con. If thou lov'ft honour, Pi&,

Or fear'ft eternal shame, command these men,
Thy fubjets, to retire.-

ift Pifi. Should he command,
It is our duty now to disobey.

Ron. Let us assail them all !

Con. [Advancing] RONAN, my friend !
Step not before me ; let me guard thy fide.-

Enter KATHUL and EURaN.

[KATHUL, coming between their sword,.]

Kath. My guefis, forbear ! and thou rebellious boy,
Put up thy sword, or flied thy father's blood !

Ron. Why dost thou guard my foes, King of the

Ides!

What is thine aim ? This is no sudden strife,
Sprung from a light and accidental cause
It'is a mortal quarrel founded deep
On.wrongs not to be borne. Let honour'd age
Avoid the fight of blood.

Kath. Hear me, rash youth !

My aim is to be jufi, and to prevent
A combat, whose event muff fatal prove
To my allies, my children and my fame.
Do thou hereafter, on some distant shore,
Pursue thy quarrel with the Pitifli king,

E 3 And

And bear the cause of Albion on thy sword.
Now 1 forbid the war, and will propound
Impartial terms of peace. He who believes
His cause is just, will readily assent.

Dur. Altho' with.us the odds of combat lie,

Not less in valour, and in number more;
If full assurance that my cause is good
Implies assent, on mine thou may'1 depend.

Ron. May my fwiord sliver, when-it firikes thy helm,
If it does not defend the better cause.

Katb. Thy foul is 'ike the torrent of thy hills !

0 ! chief of defart Morven ! Fierce thy words,.
But confident and suited to my purpose.
Behold where yonder white and ragged'cliff
Points the long ridge and terminates the bay;
There, in a cave, the sea-mark of the main,
A man unlike the reft of mortals dwells !
Once great in arms, a-breast of mighty cliiefs,
The brave ORELLAS trod the paths of Fame:
But firange misfortune croft the warrior's way.
In early youth he kill'd the fair he lov'd,
Then left mankindr to live alone with sorrow !
Bare is his bosom to the howling winds,
And wet his hoary head, with foam that flies
Front the resounding surges of the main;
The coot., the cormorant, are his companions.
Sometimes, he fays, his cries bring from her cloud.
The pallid image of the murder'd maid !

Ron. I know the fad ORELLAN. To what end'
Dost thou describe to us the man of sorrow ?-

Kath. He is the judge who cannot be unjut-!

For his pure mind no partial passion knows:
The sole affection of his breaf is pity -

The

The man of sorrow feels for human woes!
To him submit the cause of doubtful firife,
And let his voice determine of RIVINE.

Ron. Is this thy counsel, King ? and dost thou think
That it mill be regarded ? Shall RIVINE,
Like flocks or herds in contest, be adjudg'd ?
No. Whiift I live, RIVINE ilall be free;
RIVINE shall determine of herself.
She has determin'd never to behold
'he face of DURSTAN, and I will defend:
The resolution which my foul approves.

Dur. Art thou the judge ?

Ron. I am, and thou flalt find so;

Follow my iteps. In such a strife as this
The valiant know no umpire but the sword.- [Exit.

[KATHUL Jfop CONNAN.

Kath. By all the reverence thou ow'ft thy father,

And by the love thou bear'ft thy native land,
Stay 'till thou hear'it the Pit-

[While KATHUL speaks, EURAN whispers DURSTAN.

.Con. What can he fay ?
Whoftill, tho' oft defy'd, declines the combat.

Dur. KATHUL, I speak to thee. In just refpet

To thy fair condua and thy chosen jidgei
To his decision, conscious of my right,
I would submit my cause. But since the pride
Of haughty RONAN to the sword appeals,
I answer him-His challenge I accept
And will to-morrow, with the rising funi
Meet him in arms. Here, where we.firit encounter'd.
:Tis thine, 0 King! to regulate the combat.-

Katb. DURSTAN, I disapprove-

Dur. I know thou dost.

'But

But thou can'Pi not prevent. It must be so:
King of the Isles, farewell!

Kath. Tarry a while ,

Enter my hall, and of the feast partake.
The hall of Semo shines with many fires.

Dur. Falf by my ships, upon the sandy fllore,

I'll pass the night. The feast of foes I flun.-
Oft, when the circling ihell awakes the foul,
Like flints the words of enemies strike fire.
Forth comes the hasty fleel. Whoe'er prevails
A doubtful fame th' inglorious ifrife attends. [Going.

Kath. Let me conduA thy footsteps to the shore,
And shew our people that in peace we part.-

[Exeunt all but CONNAN.

Con. 'Tis not what I defir'd-'Twas my prime wish

To meet the Pi&t and to revenge my friend.
Yonder he comes impatient-

Enter RONAN.

Ron. Ha ! they're gone !
What said the Pit ?

Con. Thy challenge he accepted.

Ron. Did he ?
Con. He did; to-morrow is the time,
And this the appointed place.

Ron. Why not to-day ?
Con. It is too late, funk in the western wave,

The fun but half his glorious circle shews
Soon will the fpiendour of his path be dim,
And his pale lifter rule the silent world.

Ron. 0, thou fair light! whose beams rejoice the heart

Of him whose thoughts are open as his deeds
In thy dark chamber do not tarry long:

But,.

But, with unwonted'fpeed, thy course pursue,
'Till the grey eastern cloud grows red again, -
Before thy flaming steps.-

Con. My warriors wait.

Some care the business of to-morrow claims;
An equal number drawn from either host
Must guard the lifts! Oh ! were the combat mine;
My dearest friend once for his CONNAN fought-

Ron. When CONNAN was not there.
Con. Go to the hall.
Ron. Where is RIVINE ?

ton. To some place remote,

Far in the forest, CALMAR has convey'd her.
Uncertain is the spot, and vain it were
To seek her at this hour. Turn to the hall,
And for my fake speak gently to my father.

[Exit CONNAf.

Ron. I wish I could avoid the fight of him

And every person. When the heart is full
Of its own swelling thoughts, focizty
Is molestation. Solitude is best.
Ye woods and groves ! where I was wont to roam
With her I lov'd \ I left you in your glory!
Fair as the grove of June I It ft my love !
Not long my abfelice, yet the leaf is fallen.
Trees of the forest ! you fliall hear again
The voice of spring, and clothe yourselves a-new,
In the green robe you loft-But never more
Shall bud or bloffom-Ha ! what new event.
Brings this keen messenger.

Enter EURAN hastily.

Eur. O'prince of Morven !

Thy

Thy haughty courage, and thy upright heart,
Expose thee to the mhafts. of fecrct fraud
Which DURSTAN aims.

Ron. At me !
Eur. Of that be judge.

Whilst every eye, secure of peace, is cloth'd,
Amidit -the darkness of tie night he means
To bear RivINE from her father's house,
And fail e'er morning rife,

Ron. Ha ! I believe it.

Tlis is the secret which explains his condut.
Has he abettors in the house of KATHUL,
Or does the robber trust in force alone ?

Eur. He trusts in me.

Ron. In thee !

Eur. -I plant the vwatch

Which guards the hall of KATHUL j that he knows,
And with immense rewards assail'd my faith.
I feem'd to yield ; and thus the plan is laid:
The youth that watch to-night, by me affur'd
That they obey in mine their king's command,
Seize the princess. One bold and faithful Pi&
Waits near the northern gate to give the word,
And lead them safely through the PicEifl host:
That office DURSTAN chose.

Ron. DURSTAN !

Eur. Himself !
Wrapt in the (hades of night, alone in arms.-

Ron. I have my foul's desire ! ghost of my king !

Ghofls of my kinsmen, slain that evil day
When Albion fought without her RONAN'S arm.
Leave the dark mountains where you mourn your fate,
Not yet reveng'di and fee me meet your foe !

EURAN !

# ACT V.

EUKAN ! whate'er the lavish Pia has promisld'
To tempt thee to betray thy master's house,
Tenfold I'll give thee to preserve thy faith.
But let no man, not KATHUL, CONNAN know:
The wrong is mine, and vengeance is my right.-
The northern gate ! what is the appointed time
Of his approach .

Eur. The time that's-moll remote

From the'fun's rising or his setting beams,
When o'er the catfle, red Tonthena burns.-
Shall I thy fleps attend ?

Ron. Not for the.world !

The moon, the stars, the spirits of the night,
They only {hall behold the rough encounter.

[Exit RONAN.

Eur. There goes the chief whofe'arm in battle rules,

Whose name alone brings nations to the field.
Yet, simple as the fry, he takes the bait:
Beyond my hopes this laRs device succeeds.
One night of care, then I (hall (hake no more. [Exit.

End of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT V.
SCENE, a Wood.

Enter RONAN.
Ron.r WICE have I made the circuit of the wood,

. To walfe the weary interval; and now

Right

Right o'er the castle red Tonthena burns.
Ye fleecy clouds that fail:aIong the iky,
Come not too near the moon, to spread a veil,
Tho' transient, o'erher face. Lift up your heads,
Ye liars of heav'n ! and light the lifted field.
Methinks I fee the figure of a man
Moving this way; within the shade he keeps,
A little onward, and the /hade will fail.
'Tis he; his armour Ihines, he draws his sword,
And resolute advances. Here I'll ita'nd
'Till he comes nearer i then I'll spring upon him.
Now robber, villain, DURSTAN ! [Runs to thefide-fcene.

Enter CONNAN.

Con. RONAN, stay
Thy furious arm, 'tis CONNAN bids thee flay.

Ron. CONNAN, what strange encounter !

Con. Strange it is,

And fatal might have been; but let us trace
This error to its source. You call'd me DURSTAN,
When rufling on my fliield: if I had spoken,
I mhould have call'd thee by no other name.

Ron. Didft thou come hither too, to meet the Pit ?
Con. I came to meet the Pic. Now answer me,
Who gave the information of his purpose ?

Ron. EURAN.

Con. The traitor ! 'tis as I fufpe&ed.

That villain is confederate with )URSTAN.
To you, to me, he told the self-same tale,
And sent us forth, to shock, and fink together,
Like vessels in a storm.

Ron. It must be so;
The circumstances baniih every doubt.

This

This is another plot of that dark brain
Whose cruel guile at first o'erthrew my love.
Am I a beast of chaee, a harmless deer,
For whom the hunter plants his mortal toils,
Himself secure and safe ?

, Con. One silent fiaft,

Wing'd like the bird of night, hath o'er us flown.
Another's on the firing-If right I judge,
DURSTAN is near, and many are our foes.

Ron. Would I could fee them.

Con. We may feel them firfR,
If on this spot unguarded you remain.

Ron. Shall they not feel us too ?

Con. My friend, be calm.

Not far from hence, a little to the left,
There is a dell, whose foping fides are rough
With thick-grown hazel-In that place obscure
The belt and bravest of my warriors lie. ·
Miftruitful of the Pit, I plac'd them there.
Now let us join them, and explore with iteel
Each angle of the wood.

Ron.-Prince of the people.!

Valour and wisdom hand in hand advance,
When thou dost guide the war-let us divide
Thy band, and, parting, sooner sweep the vale.-

[Exeunt.

Enter RIVINE and CALMAR.
Riv. Didit thou not hear a voice ?

Cal. It was tie wind

Of midnight in the trees and hollows rocks.
This is no place of safety.

Riv. Yes-it is
F A

A place of safety, and of reft for me.
CALMAR, begone, and leave me to myself.
Why ftand'fi thou motionless ? Dost thou not hear ?
I bade thee leave me.

Cal. Oh ! I heard too well !

I have obferv'd the toffing of your mind
E'er since we parted from ORELLAN'S cave.
I led you to the forefl dark and wild,
Full of fequefter'd and secure retreats:
But you diflik'd each one, and roam'd about,
'Till dewy night descended on your head.
Then all at once, with a determin'd tone,
You bade me follow you; and here you are
Between the towers of Elig and the flioe.
What fort of reft, forlorn !-

Riv. Dost thou presume

On my distress ? and am I fall'n so low
That thou controul'ft me. Go-

Cal. I muff obey-
But full of sorrow is the foul of CALMAR.- [Going.

Riv. Farewell ! true-hearted CALMAR ! But thy truth

And loving service are intruders here
The part I've taken I must a& alone.

Cal. I fear her much. I'll haften to the hall,
And bring her brother or her father hither. [Adjde.

[Exit.

Riv. It is but weakness, when on death refolv'd,

Fondly to seek for cafy {ways to die.
Yet it is nature. Thrice I lifted up
The steel against my life, and thrice let fall
MLine arm, afraid to flrike the fatal blow.
I fee the oak beside the froth-clad pool,
Where, in old time, as I have often heard,

A

A woman desperate, a wretch like me,
Ended her woes: her woes were not like mine.
I love thee, RONAN ! love thee to excess,
Nor am I less belov'd. Who'hears me now ?
Silence, and night, and death, dumb as you are,
I will not utter more. RONAN will know
W\.hen he beholds me floating on the stream,
His heart will tell him why RIVINE died.-

[RunnLing of:

Enter DURSTAN, and EURAN,
Dur. Stop i

Riv. Ah!

Dur. Again thou'rt found. I'll hold thee now,
Outrageous woman,

Riv. DURSTAN, from thy mouth

Reproaches please me best. Thou haft o'erheard
A portion of my words, and needs must know
I am above thy threats i beyond the reach,
The aim of human power.

Dur. That hall be tried.

I'11 bear thee hence, confine and watch thee close,
Left thy wild frenzy work thine own perdition.
Thy fhatter'd judgmientfliall have time to join
And to unite again. Then thou Wilt bless
Thy hulband's lenity, which could forgive
Offences gross as thine.-This is the path
That thou must walk in.

Riv. Never will I walk
In the fame path with thee.

Dur. Thou haft no choice.

I have a right to rule thee-and the power
Is in my hands. I'll use it.

F 2 Riv..

Riv. Right ! what right,

Deceiver and betrayer of my foul,
Hafl thou ? But it were madness, I confess,
With thee to argue. For thy heart obdured
Admits no plea of reason or of nature.-
But DURSTAN this at leait may comprehend,
I am refolv'd, immutable, to die.
And who can hinder me ? Aboard thy fleet,
Amidst thy warriors, in the field, the hall,
In the dark dungeon or the vaulted cell,
Alike my foul is free to take its flight.
No chains, no fetters, can the spirit bind
Which makes each instrument of opposition
The weapon of its will. Art thou convinc'd ?
Or would'st thou have me call those horrors forth-
Which here inhabit, and to thy confusion
Blazon and vindicate my just despair ?
Tell thee, if words can tell-

Dur. 'Tis loss of time
To liften to thy words- [Lays hold of RrvINs;

Riv. Is there no lelp ? what will my brother think,

And RONAN, when they hear I am with DURSTAN ?
Tear me in pieces.-- [Struggtlitg.

[RONAs behind the scenes.]

Ron. Villain, quit thy prey,
And guard thyself.-

Dur. EURAN, bring up my men:

I'll flop his cofirfe.- [Exit EURAN,
[DURSTAN holding RIVINE with one hand, and drawiing

his sword with the other.]

Enter RONAN.
Dur. Halt. If thou doll advance

One

One ftep, RIVINE on the motion dies.

Ron. Inhuman murderer ! withdraw thine arm
And drop thy point. Thou fee'ft I do not stir.

Dur. Keep farther off; bend not thy. body forward;

As if preparing to spring in upon me,
And I will talk with thee. What would'st thou have ?
Why comest thou with thy weapon, ruffian like,
To rob a husband of his wedded ;wife ?
Is ihe not mine ?

Ron. No, traitor ! robber, no!

Fraud is the sole foundation of thy right,
And therefore thou haft none. If thou dar'ft trust
Thy valour, or thy cause, let go her arm,
And in her pretence with thy sword defend
Thy title like a man. Ha! dost thou smile
And mock at me ? Thou coward ! thou assassin !
Basest of men! less valiant than the deer
That graze the hills. They for their mates will bleed,
And in their fight are bold.

Dui. Rage on, rail on,

Thy ineffeaual passion I enjoy.-
Our nations, RONAN, ever have been foes.
In enmity our fathers liv'd and dy'd,
And we were born and nurs'd in mortal hate
Hereditary, ne'er to be appeas'd.--~
To fill the measure up-thou waft my rival;
I triumph'd o'er thee, and I triumph now.
Behold this woman here ! is (he not fair ?
Tho' frowardness has somewhat marr'd her beauty.
Thou doat'ft upon her, and (he loves thee too.
But I-

Ron. Insulting villain!-

Dur. If thou lift'ft
F 3 Thine

Thine arm, {he dies.

Riv. Advance and let me die,

For I have liv'd too long.-Ah ! dost thou shrink,.
Lean on thy. sword and gnaw thy quiv'ring lip ?
More tender of my life than of my fame,
Or peace of mind. Thou but prolong'lt the terra
Of Ihame and anguish. Know, I was refolv'd
(Tho' I dissembled to appease thee, RONAN)
Before this dreadful parley, not to live.
That DURSTAN knows full well.

Dur. I know not that.

I know the nature of a woman's miid,
Dire& in passion for a moment only,
And shifting like a whirlwind as it flies
To every point of heav'n.-

Riv. Thou speak'1 the truth..

I change my'purpofe now. And be affur'd.
IfI escape from thee, I shall return
To him, to RONAN, to the rightful lord
Of me. and my affeaions. Do not rfk,
By frivolous delay, thy dear revenge:
Wer't thou fluck round with eyes on ev'ry fide,.
And'hung with hands to wield a thousand swords,
Yet thou might be furpriz'd: 1rike while.thou can'.,,
And disappoint thy rival.-

Dur. Tho', indeed,

I seldom do believe what women fay,
Yet, from my foul, I do believe thee now.-
This rage of death, this fury, this dcfpair,
Are but. the smoke and vapour of that fire,
That amorous fire which in your bosom burns..
Give it the air of hope.

hon. Curse on thy tongue:

What

What dost thou mean in such discourse as this,
Self-loving DURSTAN, to consume the time ?
Thou can't not 'scape from hence. - CONNAN is near,
With all the youth of Elig at his fide,
E'er he arrives, once more I offer thee
The equal combat. If thou doubt'ft thine arm,
Commit RIVINE to her father's care.

Dur. Commit RIVINE to her father's care,
To RONAN'S care, to her dear lover's care !
He will be tender of her, and perhaps
Mlay reconcile her to the love of life..

(Looking to the Jide-fcene.

Now mighty warrior, of thy valour vain,
And trusting for success to force alone,
I have amus'd thee, till the hour is past,
The moment of equality between us:.
For tho' I deem mine arm as strong as thine,
Chance might have thrown th' advantage on thy fide.
Behold

Riv. Ha ! EURAN with the Pifts returns.

Now let the spirit of her race inspire,
In this extreme, the daughter of the Ifes..
0 prince of Morven ! guard thy noble life.
From (hame, from DURSTAN, this shall save RIVINE.

[Stabs herself.
Ron. 0 dreadful aA ! [To DURSTAN..

On thee, thou wretch accurs'd-!
Author of all our woes, I'll be reveng'd.

[They fght and are both wounded.

This to thy heart, and this-down to the ground.
[-As DURSTANfalls, EURAN enters with the Piits,

and receives him in his arms.
Dur. Thou halt it too. I leave thee to enjoy

Thy

Thy conquest and thy love.

ilt Pift. Hence: CONNAN comes. [They bear him of.
Ron. He's dead-Difhoiiour reft upon his name.
My love ! my love !-How could'st thou ?-But 'tis

done. -
I shall not long survive thee, that's my comfort.-

Riv. 0 that's the torture which I cannot bear.

I was prepar'd for death, but not for thine.
For me there was no refuge but the tomb:
With thee I could not, nor without thee, live.

Ron. 0 do not speak so tenderly, nor look
With such heart-piercing eyes.

Riv, I had one hope-

On which I lean'd, now I am all despair.
I thought (when I was dead) that from the cloud
Of grief, my hero would break forth again;
And run his conrfe of glory and of fame.-
But thou art fnatch'd away; I have undone thee;
Blasted thy youth, cut short thy noble life,
This is the fruit that thou haft gather'd, RONAN !
The only fruit of curst RIVINE's love.-

Ron. O ! I could speak such things, but not to thee,.

Whose gen'rous heart, regardless of thyself,
Amidfl despair and death for RONAN mourns.-
'Tis not thy fault. Fortune has crofs'd our love;
But I would rather be what now I am,
Than love thee less, or yet be less belov'd.

Riv. Belov'd thou art. I die; give me thy hand.-
Ron. My heart, my foul are thine.-

Riv. 0 ! best of men!
And best belov'd ! farewell, farewell for ever! [ Dies.

Ron. Flow fast my blood-why dost thou linger;

death ?

My

My heart is torn with agonizing thoughts.

! memory, would I could fly from thee !

And give my moments to a.fofter sorrow.-
Caught in an eddy, up and down the stream
I drive, and wheeling to one point return.
That monster there ! that villain ! land of ghofs !
Shall I forget it there ? [Dies.

Enter CALIAR haJlily,

Cal. Alas! my lord .
Too true the traitor's words.

Enter CONNAN with his warriors.

Con. Oh ! RONAN ! RONAN [

0 ! my ill-fated sifter ! love of thee
Brought down thei tow'ring eagle of the war,
From his high rock of fame. Let me not blame ;
Pity forbid that I ihould blame the dust
Of poor RIVINE.-Bear the bodies hence.
Let not old K-ATHUL fee his daughter's blood :-..
I left him tfanding by the corse of EURAN,
O'erwhelm'd and dumb with grief.-

Enter KATHUL.

Kath. I am the cause

Of all that has befallen. Thy father's steps
Turn to his hall no more: deaf is mine ear
For ever to the voice of youth and joy.
ORELLAN'S lonely cave flall hide my grief.
There will we dwell together, and decay
Like two old trees, whose roots hang uppermost
On some bare mountain's fide, from which each flormr

Wafteth

Wafleth a portion of the mould'ring foil,
Till down they fall.

Con. Do not indulge
Such melancholy thoughts.

Kath. I am refolv'd:

To thee, my son, the sceptre I resign;
I trust 'twill prosper in thy fledfaft hand.
Thou wilt not lifen to the tale of lies,
Nor in rash mood forsake thine antient friends.
Oh ! friend of RONAN ! be the peoples friend.
Still let thy open gate receive the stranger,
Who from the hill or from the ship descends;
So shall thy name, like grateful odour, spread
From thy own dwelling to far distant lands.
I have no other wish. My son farewell:

[Exvt KATRUL'

Con. To-morrow we a monument shall raise

To mark the place where mighty RONAN refts
With fair RIVINE, in the house of death.
If right my foul forbodes, they shall not lie
In dark oblivion: on their buried woes
The light refulgent of the song ihall rife,
And brighten the fad tale to future times.
The brave, the fair, flall give the pleating tear
Qs nature, partial to the woes of love.

FIN I S.

# EPILOGUE. Written by MR. GARRICK. SPOKEN BY MRS ABINGTON.

EPILOGUE.

Written by MR GARRICK.
SPOKEN B T MRS ABINGTON.

[Enters in a Hurry.]
,7ORGIVE my coming thus, our griefs to utter-

1'inm uch a fgure !-and infu ch a futter-

So circuintanc'd, infuch an aukward waj,
I know not what to do, or what to fay.

Our bard, a frange unfaJh2ionable creature,

As ob.finate, asfavage in his nature,
WTil1 have no Epilogue !-I told the brute-
If, Sir, these trfles don't your genius fui;
iWe have a working Prologue-fmith, within,
Willflrike one of, as if it were a pin.
Na,, Epilogues are pins,-whofe points, well-plac'd,
Will trick your AMtle out, in the tip-top tafle!
"Pins, madam! (frown'd the Bard) the Greeks us'd

" none,
'5 (Then mutt'ring Greek-fomething like this,-went

" on)

" Pinnos, painton, patcheros, non Gr.eco Modon." j
I coax'd, hefwore-" That tie him to aflake,
" He'dtfifer allfor Decency's fair fae;
" 1o Bribeiy J7ould make hin change his plan."
There's an odd mortal. Match himn if you can.
Hah, Sir ! (said 1)-your reasoning is not decp,
For when at Tragedies Jpectators weep,
* They oft, like children, cry themselves asleep. 3

Atid
* Like harmless infants mourn themselves asleep. ALEX.

[ 64 ]

.nd if no jogging Epilogue you write,
Pit, Box, and Gallely, may flegp all nlght:
" Better (hefwore)-a nap j.bould overtake ye,
" Than Folly Jbould to Folly's pranks awake ye;
" Rakes are more harmless nodding upon benches,
" rhan ogling to insnare por Jimple wenches;

A' And simple girls had better close their eyes,
Than fend 'em gadding after butterflies.

" Nay, JhlouldaJlatefnan make a box his nefC;
" Who, that his country loves. would break his reft?
" Let come what may, I will not mhake 'em laugh,
" Take for ar Epilogue-This Epitaph.
"' For as my lovers lives, I would notfave,
" No poiJ'nouis weeds Jhall root upon their grave.1"
'Tis thus these pedant Greek-readpoets vapour-
Is it your plenafire I /bould read the paper ?

Here, in the arms of death, a matchless pair,

A young-lov'd hero, and beloved fair,
Now find repofe.-Their virtues tempeit-tolR,
Sea-sick, and weary, reach the wifl'd-for coafL
Whatever mortal to this spot is brought,
0 may the living by the dead be taught!
May here Ambition learn to clip her wing,
And Jealousy to blunt her deadly fling;
Then {hall the Poet every wifll obtain,
Nor RONAN and RIVINE die in vain.

ALONZO.

A

TRAGEDY.
Et mentemJrin.lxt patrie pietatis imago, VIRGIL.

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEMENT.
T HE author of the following Tragedy,

has, in his former attempts of the fame

kind, avoided to trouble the reader with
either dedication or preface. His chief rea-
son for declining this common mode of ap-
pearing before the public, was the necessity,
which it would lay him under, of speaking
concerning himself and his works. The
success of ALONZO calls upon him to depart
from his former plan; and to break that.fi-
lence, which might now be reckoned arro-
gant, and even ungrateful, to those, from'
whom he in a great measure derives his fuc-
cess..

He embraces with pleasure, this occasion,,

to acknowledge his obligations to THE MA-
NAGERS of the Theatre, whose friendly, an-
xious, and afive zeal he hath so often ex-
perienced: To THE PERFORMERS, who have
so firenuoufly contended with each other
in their very generous endeavours to em-
bellifh the representation of the piece: To
MRS BARRY-but the public voice has ex-
alted HER above his praise: Yet he. claims

B 2. the

[ -iv ]

the merit of having,, before others, obfer-
ved her now allowed and unrivalled ex-
cellence. From the colour of the dawn, he
foretold the brightness of the day.

For MRS BARRY he wrote the part of Or-

milinda, and the most flattering circum-
stance to himn, in the success of his play, is
the univereal opinion, (vouched, not only
by the loudest applause that ever shook the
tIage, but by the greatest effusion of tears)
that the ACTRESS so much exalted THE CHA.
RACTER, that she exceeded all imagination,
and reached the summit of perfetion.

PROLOGUE,

# PROLOGUE. SPOKEN BY MR PALMER.

PROLOGUE.

SPOKEN BBT MR PALMER.
TvrHILSTardent Zealfor India's Reformation,

Hath ir'd the Spirit of a generous Nation;

Whi/l Patriots ofprefented Lacks complain,
And Courtiers Bribery to Excess arrtaign;
The Maxims of BengalJ.ill rule the Stage,
The Poets are your Slaves from Age to Age.
Like Eaflern Princes in this House youJit,
The Soubahs, and Nabobs offuppliant Wit;
Each Bard his Present brings, when he draws near;'
IVith Prologue firfi, hefooths your gracious Ear;
We hope your Clemency will Jjine to Day,
For tho' despotic, gentle is your Sway.
These conscious Walls if they cou'dfpeak wou'dtell,
Howfeldom by your Doom, a Poet fell:
Tour Mercy oft fifpends the Critics Laws,
Tour Hearts are partial, to an Author's Cause.
Pleas'd wihth fich Lords, content with our Condition,
Againfl your Charter we will ne'er petition:
If certain Folks Jhould fend us a Committee,
(Like that which lately v/ited the City)
7Who withoutfpecial Leave of our D;irelors,
At the Stage DoorJhlou'd enter as Infpeótors;
Altho' their Hearts were arm'd with triple Brasss
Thro' our reJf/lng Scenes, they could not pass.
Lions and Dragons too keep watch and ward,
Wiitchcs and GhoJAs the auful entrance guard;

[The Curtain rifes.

Heroes who mock the pointedfioord are here,
And desperate Heroines who know no Fear;

[ vi 3]

Ifas RinaldoJaout each man jlouldprove,
To brave the Terrors of the inchanted Grove,
Here on thisfpot, the Cemter of our State,.
Here on this veryfpot they'd meet their Fate.
The Prompter gives the Sign, and down they go;

-' . . ...[The Curtain falls,.

Alive aifcending to the Shades below.
To you whole Empire flill may Heaiv'n maintain,
Who here by antient Right and Cuiom reign,
Our Lions couch, our Dragons proJtratefall,
Witches and Ghofls obey your-potent Call.
Our Heroinesfmile on you with alltheir might,
Our bold/ef Heroes tremble in your Sight,
,Even now with anxious Hearts they watch your Eyes,
Shouldyou bhut frown, even brave ALoNzo lies.

DRAiIATIS

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DRAMATIS -PERSOVNS.
As Originally Performed at Drury Lane.

M E N.

KING, ...... ...... Mr AICKE,.
ALONZO, ....... MIr REDDISR.
ALBERTO (his Son) Mr CLINCH;
COSTOLLO, ....... Mr J. AICKEN.
SEBASTIAN, ...... Mr PALMER.
HAMET, ........ Mr WRIGHT.
VELASCO, ....... Mr JEFFERSON.
MESSENGER, ...... Mr J. BANNISTER.

WOMEN.

ORBMISINDA, ...... Mrs BARRY.
TERESA, ........ Miss MANSELL.

Officers and Attendants, &c.

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

DR'AMATIS PERSONE.
As Lately Performed at Edinburgh.

M E N.

KING, ......... Mr CRESWELL.
ALONZO, ... . . Mr WOODs.
ALBERTO (his Son) Mr SIDDONS.
COSTOLLO, ....... Mr BEW.
SEBASTIAN, ...... Mr MELVIN.
HAMET, ........ Mr MOUNTFORT.
VELASCO, ....... Mr BLAND.
MESSENGER, ...... Mr DE CAMP.

W 0 M E N.

ORMISINDA, ..... Miss GOUGa.
TERESA, ...... Miss KEMBLE.

Officers and Attendants, Z&.
The Pafages marked with inverted Commas are omit-

ted in the Representation.

# ALONZO.

ALONZO.

A CT I.
SCE;NE, A tall hi the Palae- of the Kifit

of Spai1n.

ORIISINDA. TERESA.
Orm. HIS roll contains the secret of my life,

And of the state; My marriage with
ALONZO,

The story of my son, my injur'd child,
Bred in a desert, tho' the heir of Spain.
To thee, my faithful friend, my lov'd TERESA !
This precious record I commit. O ! keep it
From fight of human eye, till better times:.
For still I hope that better times may comer
Tho' not to me, to this affli&ed land.
" My hand hath signed it, and my aft to-day
" Shall give it faith and credence with mankind."-
This will explain the mystery of'my fate,
And tell the world why ORFISINDA died,

[Gives the wr.ting
Ter. Do not too soon despair.

Orm. I wait the last

Decisive moment. " But to-guard my foul
" Againa the sallies of a ra.h despair,

' Againflt

DRA4M TIS PERSONE.
As Lately Performed at Edinburgh.

M E N.

KING, ......... Mr CRESWELL.
ALONZO, ...,... Mr WOODs.
ALBERTO (his Son) Mr SIDDONS.
COSTOLLO, ........ Mr BEW.
SEBASTIAN, ...... Mr MELVIN.
HAMET, ........ Mr MOUNTFORT.
VELASCO, ...... . Mr BLAND.
MESSENGER, ...... Mr DE CAMDP.

W OME N.

ORMISINDA, ..... Miss GOUGH.
TERESA, ........ Miss KEMBLE.

Officers and Attendants, &s.
-The Pajages marked with inverted Commas are omi -

ted in the Representation.

.LONZO.

ACT I.
S'CEN , A fll Haz the Palace of the Kitgt

of S.pain.

ORAMISINDA, TERESA.
Orm. '. HIS roll contains the secret of my life,

-T And of the Rate: My marriage with

ALONZO,

The story of my son, my injur'd child,
Bred in a desert, tho' the heir of Spain.
To thee, my faithful friend, my lov'd TERESA !
This precious record I commit. O ! keep it
From fight of human eye, till better times:-
For till I hope that better times may comet
Tho' not to me, to this affli&ed land.
" My hand hath signed it, and my aa to-day

Shall give it faith and credence with mankind.":

This will explain the mystery of my fates
And tell the world why ORaISINDA died,

[Gives the wr/it'..
Ter. Do not too soon despair.

Orm. I wait the last

Decisive moment. " But to-guard my foul
" Against the sallies of a rash despair,

"Agailnft

" Against the weakness which attends surprise,
" I have forecast whatever may befall,
" And fram'd to the event my firm resolve."
This is the day appointed for the combat,
Between a Moorish and a Christian knight,
To end the wars of Spain, and fix the fate
Of the contending nations.

Ter. Antient times,.

If tales of antient times may be believ'd,
Have known such combats. In her infant ifate,
Against her rival Alba, Rome was pledg'd
As now Afuria is: But later times
Afford no parallel.

Orm. There never was,.

Nor will there ever, while the world endures,
Be found a parallel to my distress.-
I am the viftor's prize-whoe'er prevails
He gains the princess, and the crown of Spain.
Such is the solemn treaty, sworn, confirm'd,
By every rite which either nation owns.
Mean while I am ALONZo's wedded wife-
I am a mother-by the false ALONZO,
Who from his hate to me abandons Spain,
Which he alone can save. " No other arm
" Can match Mirmallon's force. Proud of his strength,
" Already in the lifts the Moor exults,
" Secure of victory." The setting fun
Concludes the dreadful period of fufpence,
And death alone from infamy can save me.

Ter. He yet may come. Far in the Nubian wilds,

That guard the secret sources of the Nile,
VELASCO found the chief. The wind of spring,
The conflant east, this year forgot its season,

i~~~~~~~~~_J

And only since this moon her light renew'd,
Began to blow upon the western fore.
On that I build a hope.

Orm. I have no hope !

Review the story of my life, TERESA,
And by the past conje&ure of the future.
First my lamented brother, blindly led
By Proud Ramirez, quarrell'd with ALONZO,
'I'hen by ALONZO's sword Ramirez fell.
For that offence to banishment condemn'd,
ALONZO vwon me to accept his hand
Before he left this kingdom. Since that time,
What I have fuffer'd, Heav'n, and you can tell.
It was the fifth, a memorable day,
After our marriage, when he fail'd to come,
At the appointed place, to meet his bride.
Then 'midst my fear, anxiety, and sorrow,
For only death I thought, or dangerous harm,
Could keep him from my arms, amaz'd I heard
That he was gone for Asia. To this hour,
Ev'n to this present hour, no cause affign'd
But these diftra&ed lines long after sent;
Thou never Jbalt behold ALONZO more;
The foul, foul cause, thyj guilty conJference knows.
My conscience knows no cause, so help me Heav'n !
Now, in my utmofl need, this dreadful day,
VThlen I must struggle with despair and Death,
To keep myself a chaste, a blameless wife,
And to my silent grave the secret bear,
That my dear son and his may live to wield
The sceptre of his fathers !

Ter. To this hour,
Thy husband knows not that he is a father.

Orm.

Orm. His ears, his eyes are shut. Oft' have I sent

Letters that would have pierc'd a heart of stone
Pleading for pity, begging but to know,
Wherein I had unwittingly offended:
But every letter, with unbroken feal,
To me return'd. He will not read one word
From my detested hand.

Ter. 'Tis very firange,

And much unlike the way of other men.
For tho' they are inconstant in their love,
There is a course and process in'the change:
" Ardent at first, their ardour lasts not long.
" With easy, full, secure possession cloy'd,
" Their passion palls, and cold indifference comes,
" As chilly autumn Reals on summer's prime,
" Making the green leaf yellow. Then it is
" That some new beauty takes their roving eyes,
" And fires their fancy with untafted charms."
But in.a moment, from excess of love,
To the extreme of hate, ALONZO pass'd
Without a cause. " Nor did another come
" Between thee and the current of his love,
" 'Tis moon-struck madness, or the dire effe&
"Of incantation, charm, compulsive spell,
" Bymagic faften'd on his wretched foul.
" It can be nothing else."

Orm. Whate'er it is,

He lihuns all woman-kind. His life is spent
In war and in devotion. When the field
Is won, the ivarrior lays aside his spear,
Takes up the pilgrim's fIaff, and all alone,
Obfcur'd in homely weeds, he bends his course
To some remote, religious, holy place,

Where

Where he exceeds the ftriteft penitent,.
In penances severe and fad austerity.
,' Sometimes in deeper melancholy wrapt,
" He loaths the fight of man, and to the cliffs
"Of hoary Caucasus or Atlas fies,
" Where all the dreary winter he remains,
' And, desolate, delights in desolation."
My faithful servant Juan saw him once
Upon the ledge of Atlas on a rock,
" Beside the empty channel of a brook,"
He stood and gaz'd intent, a catara&,
Which, as it tumbled from a cliff, the blast
Had caught mid-way, and froze before it fell.
Juan drew near and call'd. He turn'd about,
Look'd at him for a space, then wav'd him back,
And, mounting swiftly, funk behind the hill.
Wan was his face, and like a statue pale 1
His eye was wild and haggard! Oh ! TERESA,
Amidst my woes, my mifcries, my wrongs!
My bosom bleeds for him !

Ter. Something there is

Mysterious and unfathomable here,
Which passes human wisdom to divine.
"' The hand of fate is on the curtain now.
" Within my breast a firm persuasion dwells,
" That in the lifts ALONZO will appear."
Behold in haste the KING your father comes,
And seems the messenger of welcome tidings.

Enter the KING.

King. I come in this alarming hour, my child,

To pour a ray of comfort on thy heart.
A valiant Moor, once captive of my sword,

C And

And ever since my firm but secret friend,
Acquaints me that a champion is at hand,
Shunning those honours which the Moors would pay:
Dark and referv'd he travels thro' their towns
Without a name. I-judge it is ALONZO;
For the description belt accords with him.
Scorning his foes, -offended with his friends,
Shrouded in anger and in deep disdain,
Like some prime planet in eclipse he moves,
Gaz'd at and sear'd.

Orm. It is ! It is ALONZO !

Welcome, most welcome, in whatever- hape.
The hero comes to save his native land,
To save the honour of the Chriltian name,
And o'er the fading crescent of the Moor
Exalt the holy cross.

King. And, ev'n as thine

Is the consenting voice of all the land.
The hope of Spain on brave ALONZO refts.
In this I fee the'ruling hand of heav'n:
"Which to its own eternal purpose leads,
"By winding paths, the fieps of erring man !
"Painful it were to speak of those events,
" Sad and disastrous, which have laid us low."
Unjuflly was ALONZO banifh'd hence,
And happily the hero now returns.
" For since my son, your valiant brother, fell,
"With an impartial mind I have enquir'd
" And trac'd the story of ALONZO'S birth."
He is the offspring of our antient kings,
The rightful heir of Riccaredo's line,
Called the Catholic, who reign'd in Spain,
Before the sirs iavafion of the Moors.

Loft

Lot in the gen'ral wreck, buried and hid
Beneath the ruins of a fallen state,
Obscure, unknown, the royal infant lay,
When I, indignant of a foreign yoke,
In wild Afturia rose against the Moors.
The righteous cause prevail'd ; the baffled foe
Retir'd, and left us and our mountains free.
The grateful people chose their leader king.
I knew not then, nor did my people know,
Ought of ALONZO.

" Orm. I have heard him own

"The juflice of thy title to command
" And rule the state thy valour had reftor'd.
"Enough, he said, remain'd for him to conquer:
" The fertile provinces of ample Spain,
" Whih fill the Moor usurps."

King. Of all mankind,

He is the champion whom my foul desires
This day to fight for Spain and for my daughter;
" Not only for his great renown in arms,
" But for his birth, his linage, and'his blaod.
" If his unconquer'd arm in fight prevails,

The antient monarchy shall rife again,

" In all its splendour and extent of empire.
"The streams of royal blood divided now,

Shallroll a tide united thro' the land."
Orn. " Thy heart dilates with pleasing hopes, my

" father !

" And fond anticipates its own desire."
But who can tell the purpofS of ALONZO ?
His strange approach no friendly aspec bears:
He comes the foe determin'd of the Moors,
But-not to us a friend.

C 2 King.

King. Of that no fear.

I know him proud, impetuous, and fierce,
Haughty of heart, and high of hand: Too prompt
On all occasions to appeal to arms.
But he was ever gentle to my daughter:-
"The proud ALONZO bow'd the knee to thee,
" At his departure I obferv'd thy grief,
" And in my mind"- (A trumpet founds.)

Orm. What means that shout of war ?
King. The trumpet founds to arms.

Enter a MESSENGER.

Mejf. Thy presence, Sir,

Is at the camp requir'd. Both nations arm,
And ruth to battle: Loud the Moors complain
'Of violated faith. A Spanish knight
They fay has broke the treaty, and attack'd
Their bands, of peace secure.

King 'Tis basely done I

Command my guards to meet me at the gate.
Farewell. [Exit the KING.

Ter. Who can this headlong warrior be ?

Too well ALONZO knows the laws of war,
Too much reveres the treaty seal'd and sworn,
'To make a rash attempt upon the Moors.

Orm. " If it is he, 'tis no deliberate aft,

" No treacherous intention to aftail
" The Moors ungarded." Yet it may be he:
My mind misgives me that it is ALONZO.
Ill would his swelling spirit brook the fight
Of Moorish tents and arms on yonder plain.
if, as he pass'd, one flighting word was dropt,
With tenfold scorn to that he would reply,

Nor

Nor hesitate alone to draw his sword
Amidit a holt of Moors.

Ter. The clamour finks.

Whate'er it was, the tumult is appeas'd.
And now what does my ORMISINDA think
Of my predicions ?

Orm. Oh ! my dear TERESA !-

" Thy fond desire to,chear my hopeless heart
" Makes thee for ever to my mind present
"The fairest fide of things."

Ter. Ha ! dofl thou doubt
Still of his coming ?

Orm. No, I think 'tis he;

But hope and fear alternate sway my mind:
Like light and ihade upon a waving field
Coursing each other, when the flying clouds
Now hide and now reveal the fun of heav'n.
I tremble for the issue of the combat;
And if my Lord should, as I hope, prevail,
I tremble for myself: Afraid to fee,
Tho' sick with itrong impatience to behold him,
And learn why he forsook his ORMISINDA.
HIe fays I know the cause. Oh ! most unjust
Was it because I lov'd him to excess,
Altho' his title thook my father's throne ?
Was it because I join'd my fate to his,
And fondly chore to wed a banifh'd man ?
For such are my demerits.

Ter. 'Tis but vain

Thus to torment thyself, and rack thy mind
With fad conjeaures, at a time like this,
When the reality will soon be known.

" Ortm. I know one thing that's real, 'tis a fault,

C 3 " An

" An imperfection which I cannot cure;
"Eighteen long years are pals since I beheld him,
" And grief and care, those tenants that deface
"The fad and dreary mansion they inhabit,
" Have dwelt with me. Am I not alter'd much ?
" The ghost and ihadow of what once I was ?

" Ter. No, ORMISINDA, I perceive no change,

" That in the least impairs thy lovely form.
" The beam that gilds the early morn of youth
"Yields to the splendour of a riper hour:
" The rose that was so fair in bud, is blown;
" And grief and care, tho' they have dwelt with thee,
" Have left no traces of their visitation,
"But an impression sweet of melancholy
"Which captivates the foul. Unskilful they
" Who dress the queen of love in wanton smiles:
" Brightest she shines amidst a fhow'r of tears;
" The graces that adorn her beauty molt,
" Are softness, sensibility, and pity.

Orm. " Oh ! how ingenious thou art, TERESA,

" How subtle to elude my simple fears !
" Still they advance and gather round my heart."-
If nothing can recall ALoNzo's love,
Let him but own his son, and I'll renounce
The title of his wife, and of a queen;
Then in a convent hide me and.my sorrows.
"The saddest filler of the holy train,
"Whose watchful zeal prevents the midnight bell,
"Shall find me kneeling on the marble floor."
Oh! it will be the luxury of grief,
To weep incessant in the vaulted cell,
To lift my hands, and fend my vows to heav'n,
Invoking every power that dwells above,

To

# ACT II.

To guard and bless my husband and'my son !
Perhaps some friend, moi likely my TERESA,
When I am quite forsaken and forgot
By all the world, will still remember me;
Will come and tell me of ALONZO's wars;
Tell how my boy in his firt battle fought,
At once the rival of his father's fame.

End of the FIRST ACT.

ACT II.

SCENE, A Hall, &c. as before.
Enter the KING and a Mooriyj Offcer, with Moors and

Spaniards.
King. T AMET, impartial justice shall be done,

1H1 And thou I know as justly wilt report it:
Thou art the friend of peace.

Ham. Therefore I fought

This office ; for in yonder camp, 0 ! KING,
Some counsellors there are who urg'd the Caliph
To take advantage of this fair occasion
And hold the treaty void.

King. That I believe,

But with your aid I hope to'difappoint them;
My guards are gone to bring th' offender hither.

Ham. Yonder they come, and thro' their files I fee
A prisoner.

Enter Guards with a Young Man armed.
King. Ha! by heav'n, he's but a youth,

A

A beardless boy, " and like a woman fair."
He moves my pity much. Unhappy youth !

[To the prioner.

Art thou the chief of that unruly band,
Who broke the treaty and assail'd the Moors ?

Youth. No chief, no leader of a band am I.

The leader of a band insulted me,
And those he led barely assail'd my life;
With bad success indeed. If felf-defence
Be criminal, 0 KING ! I have offended.

King. [To Hamet.] With what a noble confidence

he speaks

"See what a spirit through his blulhes breaks !
" Qbferve him, HAMET.

" Ham. I am six'd upon him."

King. Didit thou alone engage a band of Moors

And make such havock ? Sure it cannot be.
Recall thy fcatter'd thoughts. Nothing advance
Which proof may overthrow.

routh. What I have said

No proof can overthrow. Where is the man,
Who speaking from himself, not from reports
And rumours idle, will fland forth and fay
I was not single when the Moors attack'd me ?

Ham. I will not be that man, tho' I confess,

That I came hither to accuse thee, Youth !
And to demand thy punifhment.-I brought
The tale our soldiers told.

Youth. The tale was false.
Ham. I thought it true; but thou haft {hook my

faith.-

'The feal of truth is on thy gallant form,
For none but cowards lie."

King.

King. Thy story tell,

With every circumstance which may explain
The seeming wonder; how a single man
In such a firife could stand ?

Touth. 'Twill cease to be

A wonder, when thou hear't the story told.
This morning, on my road to Oviedo,
A while I halted near a Moorish poll.
Of the commander I enquir'd my way,
And told my purpose, that I came to fee
The famous combat. With a scornful smile,
With taunting words and gestures he replied,
Mccking my youth. Advis'd me to return
Back to my father's house, and in the ring
To dance with boys and girls. He added too
That I thould fee no combat. That no knight
Of Spain durf meet the champion of the Moors,
Incens'd I did indeed retort his scorn.
The quarrel grew apace, and I defied him
To a green hill, which rose amidst the plain,
An arrow's flight or farther from his port.
Alone we sped: at once we drew, we fought.
The Moorish captain fell. Enrag'd, his men
Flew to revenge his death. Secure they came
Each with his utmost speed. Those who came first
Single I met and flew. " More wary grown"
The reft together join'd, and all at once
Assail'd me. Then I had no hopes of life..
But suddenly a troop of Spaniards came
And charg'd my foes, who did not long sustain
The shock, but fled, and carried to their camp
That false report which thou, O KING ! haft heard.

King. Now by my sceptre, and my sword, I fvwear,

Thou

Thou art a noble youth. " An angel's voice
" Could not command a more implicit faith
" Than thou from me haR gain'd." What thinlk'I thou,

HAmIET ?
Is he not greatly wrong'd ?

Ham. By Allah ! yes.

The voice of truth and innocence is bold,
" And never yet could guilt that tone assume."
I take my leave, impatient to return,
And satisfy my friends that this brave youth
Was not th' aggressor.

King. I expct no less
From gen'rous HAMET. [Exit HADIET and Moor.,

King. Tell me, wond'rous Youth !

For much I long to know; what is thy name ?
Who are thy parents ? Since the Moor prevail'd,
The cottage and the cave have oft conceal'd
From holiile hate the noblest blood of Spain;
Thy spirit speaks for thee. Thou art a {hoot
Of Ibme illuilrious stock, some noble house
Whose fortunes with their falling country fell.

Tout;. ALBERTO is my name. I draw my birth

From Catalonia; in the mountains there
My father dwell, and for his own domains
Pays tribute to the Moor. He was a foldicr:
Oft I have heard him of your battles speak,
" Of Cavadonga's and Olalies' field."
But ever since I can remember ought,
His chief employment and delight have been
To train me to the use and love of arms;
In martial exercise we pas the day;
Morning and evening, fill the theme was war.
He bred me to endure the summer's heat,

And

And brave the winter's cold: To swim across
The headlong torrent, when the floals of ice
Drove down the fream. To rule the fiercest feed
That on our mountains run. No savage beast
The forest yields that I have not encounter'd.
Meanwhile my bosom beat for nobler game;
I long'd in arms to meet the foes of Spain.
Oft I imiplor'd my father to permit me,
Before the truce was made, to join the host.
He said it muff not be, I was too young
For the rude service of these trying times.

King. Did he permit you now ?

alb. A firange adventure

Forc'd me from home. Not many days ago,
When hunting in the woods, I heard a voice,
A woman's voice, calling aloud for help.
I rufl'd into the thicket; there I saw
A Mooridh Lord, " for brutal licence fam'd,"
Who shamefully abus'd a rural maid
Of Spanish race. I freed her from his arms.
The Moor spake not a word, but mad with rage
Snatch'd up his lance, which Rood against a tree,
And at me flew. I turn'd his point aside,
And with a slender javelin pierc'd his heart.
I hasten'd home, but did not find my father;
Nor was it safe to wait for his return.
I took the fairet armour in the hall,
And hither bent my. course. The reft thou know'ft.

King. Thou art a prodigy, and fill'ft my mind

With thoughts profound and expecation high.-
" When in a nation, humbled by the will
" Of Providence, beneath an haughty foe,
" A person rifes up, by nature rear'd,

" Sublime,

" Sublime, above the level of mankind;
" Like that bright bow, the hand of the most High
' Bends in the wat'ry cloud: He is the sign
"Of profp'rous change and interposing heav'n:
"And thou, if right I read"-

Enter MESSENGER.

Mef: The champion, Sir,

Who comes to fight for Spain, is near at hand:
One of our scouts has seen him and his train,
But brings a itrange report, which damps the heart
Of every Spaniard: It is not ALONZO.

King. What fay'ft thou ? " God of heavn !" Not

ALONZO !
Who is he then

Meg. That is not fully known.

Clad in the flowing vesture of the east,
A Persian turban on his head he wears,
Yet he's a Christian knight. To mark his faith,
Holy, and adverse to Mohammed's law,
Before his steps a silken banner borne
Streams in the wind, and ihews a golden cross.

King. " Send out another scout.

" AIef. There is not time
'1 To go and to return."

King. " Begone, begone,

" And let me be obey'd." Alas! my hopes
Arc vanifli'd like a dream. [Exit MEssENGER.

" Alb. I grieve to fee
"The King affliEted.

" King. Ah ! Thou dost not know
" How deep these tidings strike."

Alb. -Is not the KING

Free

Free to accept or to refuse the aid
This firanger offers ?

King. If I am, what then?

Alb. Be not offended, Sir, at my prellumption,

For from my heart I speak, a loyal heart,
True to my fov'reign and my native land.
if tiis is not ALON;zo, why fIould he,
Or any flrangoer, fight the cause of Spain ?
Arc there nOt warriors born of Spanifli race,
Who court the comb.t ?

King. To my words attend.

The M.oorish champion is of great rnown ;
In hlature like the giant race of old,
"Like Anak's true, or Titan's fabled sons."
Ayainft the foe nor sword nor spear he lifts,

uat in his might secure, a mace he wields,
Whocf sway refiltlefs breaks both fideld and arm,
And crushes head and helmet. Thus he fights,
\lhofe fatal prowess turn'd the doubtful scale
Of three successive battles. " He is deem'd
" Invincible but.by ALoNZO'S arm :
Therefore our warriors, tho' they know no fear,
No fear of ought that can'themfelves befall,
Anxious for Spain, to great ALONZO yield,
And on his valour reft.

Alb. Oft' have I heard

Miy father speak of brave ALONzo's deeds;
What can with-hold him when his country calls ?
Perhais the last of combats he has fought,
And in Lihe silent tomb the hero relts.
But, fincc he's absent, from whatever caufc,
0 ! let no stranger knight his place aflume,
" To bring diflonour on the Spanifli name.

D "If

" If tills gigantic chanipon of the Moors,
" Clad in the glory of'his battles won,
" Dazzles the warriors, and confounds their valour "
Let me, tho' young in arms, the combat claim;
On me his fame has no irmpreion made.
I'11 meet the giant with a scarless heart.
It beats for battle now. Oft' have I kill'd
The wolf, the boar, and the wild mountain bull,
For sport and paflime. Shall this lMoJorilh dog
Resist me fighting in my country's caufc ?

King. By heav'n and earth, thou mov'ft me much !

thy words

Have flirr'd the embers of my youthful fire.
Thou mak'ft me wifl I could recall those days,
Whcn of an age like thine, and not unlike
To thee in face and form, I rais'd ihe fpcar
Against the MIoor, in Cava's bloody field.
" Then by my hand the great Alcliammon fell,
; The Rrength and pi.llr of the Caliph's holt.
" Then I was fit to meet Mlirmallon's arm."
But now, my hairs are gray, my fleps are flow,
My sword descending breaks the Ihield no more:
Our foes have know;vn it long .---

Aib. 0 ! KII:,G thou art

Thy country's great deliv'rer, and the sole
Rellorer of the flare. Pelanio's fame
Shall never die: But let thy coun:,:l now
(As oft' t!hy valour) favc this land from fhamc.
Let not a forecin warrior take the field,
And fnatcl the glory from the lance of Spain.

Kig. My voica alone cannot determine that.

IThe council fit afnelblcd near the lifts,
To them I will present the.. If this knight

Unknown,

Unknown, who froml that distant region comes,
W\here the bright fun lights up his golden lamp,
Bears not some high pre-eminelce about him,

lWhich marks him out our furcft safest choice,
Ily voice is for a Spaniard, and for thee !

.//b. Upon my knees, that ne'er were bow'd before
To mortal man, I thank thee !

Kingr. Rife, ALBERTO! -

To ine no thanks are due. A greater King,
The King of Kings, I deem hath chosen thee
To be the champion of his law divine
Ainl;llt the Infidel.-If not for this,
For some great purpose sure thou art ordain'd.
" Bred in the desert, and by heav'n endued
" With force and valour marvellously great,"
Conduted by a hand unseen, thyself
Not knowing whither, and this day produc'd'
Before the nations.

Alb. Ah ! my foul's on fire !

Should such a glorious defliny be mine !
May I entreat to go without delay ?
I fear some gallant warrior may ftep forth
And claim the fight before me.

Kling. Stay, SEBASTIAN,
And to my daughter tell what has befall'n.

[Exeunt KING and ALBER'ro,

iManet SEBASTIAN.

Seb. How many changes mark this awrful day!

What must the Princess susser ! Well I know
That fle above all others wvill'd ALONZO.

Enter ORMlSINDA and TERESA.
Ter. It is a false report. In times like these

D 2 The

The minds of men are credulous and weak:
"To rumour's filifting.blaft they bow and bend,
" Like corn of slender reed, to every wind."
Thou know'ft that from the East ALONZO comes.
Might not the hasty meflenger mistake
For him some turban'd warrior of his train ?

Orm. O ! good SEBASTIAN, canst thou tell me ought
Is it ALONZO ?

Scb. If report speaks truth,
And so the KING believes, 'tis not ALoszo.

Orm. Then I am loft, TERESA.

Ter. Haft thou heard,
If not ALONZO, who this firanger is ?

Seb. His garb bespeaks him native of the East,

But from whatever clime the warrior comes,
I hope, my Princess! that he comes in vain.
Another warrior, and of Spanilh race,
Now claims the combat for his native land.

Orm. Of Spanish race ! Who is this Knight of Spain.
Seb. A wonder ! never was his equal seen,

For daring valour and address in arms.
He has not yet attain'd the prime of youth;
His look partakes more of the boy than man;
Buthe hath vanquifl'd men. This day the Moors
Have felt his hand.

Orm. Ha ! Is it he, SEBASTIAN,
Who was the author of the late alarm ?

Seb. The fame.
Orm. And whence does this young hero come ?,
Scb. From Catalonia. In the deserts there
His fire, obscure, tho' once a warrior, dwells.

Orm. From Catalonia ! In the desert bred !

TERESA !

TERESA ! All that's possible I fear:
What if th- vwuth-

Ter. 0 ! t.:lk how many youths- [To ORMISINDA,

Of Spanish race in Catalonia dwelt.
" Be recollected whilst I afl SEBASTIAN
" A queflion that at once all doubt resolves."
Has this youth no name Haft thou not heard
How he is call'd ? [7o SEBASTIAN.

Seb. He calls himself ALBERTO.
Orm. Mother of God !
Ter. [To hei.] Beware !- The Princess grieves,

That Spain depriv'd of great ALONzo's aid,
Should reft her safety on a stripling's arm. [T o SEBASTIAN.

Orm. No judge of warriors or of combats I

But lure this youth, tho' ne'er so brave and bold,
Of tender years, who has not reach'd his prime,
Is moil unfit to cope vith strong Mirmallon.

Seb. Heroes must not be judg'd by common rules.

Irregular like comets in their course,
Who can compute.the period when they flhine ?
Lady ! if thou had'st seen this gallant youth,
If thou had'st heard him, when oblig'd to speak,
In felf-defence, he told his wond'rous deeds,
As if he thought them nothing: Thy faint heart
Would from his fire have caught the flame of hope,
Thou would'fl, even as thy royal father did,
Believe he was created and ordain'd,
IBy heav'ii supreme, the champion of his country.

7Tr. SEFBASTIAN, go, and find this gallant youth.

Tell him, the Princess, partial to the brave,
Desires his presence.

Scb. Gladly I obey. [Exit SEBASTIAN.
Or/'. He's gone. Now I may speak. My son ! my son!

D3 My

My hope, my comfort, in despair and death !
The only ltar in my dark sky that shone !
Must thy unhappy mother live to fee
Thy light extinguilh'd ? I will not permit
This mofl unequal combat. I'll proclaim
My fatal flory, and declare his birth.

Ter. Think. what mufl follow. Absolute perdition!'
Orm. Is not his death perdition ? Can he meet

The Moor and live ? " How fliould his tender youth
" Refill the giant, who has overthrown
" Squadrons entire, and trampled on the necks.
" Of firmest warriors ?"

Ter. 'Tis not yet decreed

That he fiall fight the Moor. The stranger knight,
Who was at first miflaken for ALONZO,
Comes not so far, without a name in arms,
To gain the suffrage of t he Peers of Spain,
When once that name is known.

Orm. TERESA, no.

Aly fate has fill one even tenor held,
From bad to worse. " When I had fram'd my mindL
" To one difarter, then a greater came."
I had made death familiar to my thoughts;
I could embrace the fpetre like a friend:
But f(ill I kept a corner of my heart
Safe and untouch'd. My dearetl child was there:
Amidaf the ruins of the wife and queen,
The mother flood secure. " 0 thou, ALONZO !
"If yet thine eyes behold the light of day,
" What sorrow and rcmorfe mult be thy portion,
" When thou shalt hear"--Now promise me, TERESA.,
That when my son and I are laid in dust,
(For each event accelerates our doom)

Thou

Thou wilt seek out and find this cruel man ;
'rell him how Spain, the kingdom of his fathers,
By him deserted; was for ever loft:
" How his forsaken wife in honour died- -
" But that's not much-for me he will not mourn."
Then tell him of his son, to wring his heart!
Truly describe the boy ! how brave he was!
How beautiful ! how from the cloud obscure
In which his careful mother had involv'd him,
He burfi the champion of his native land:
Then tell him how the fpringirg hero fell
Eeneath a stronger arm, fighting for Spain,
And for his mother ; fighting with the foe
His father-fhould have fought, and could have van-

quifl'd !.
Ter. SEBASTIAN comes.

EJner. SEBASTIAN.

Seb. All is revers'd again :

The stranger knight is for ABDALLAH known,
The Persian prince, ALONzo's chosen friend,.
Hiis only equal in the strife of arms.
To him the combat is decided.

OG'm. I know

His flory well; he is the Sophy's son,
The eldest born and Perfia's'rightful heir;
But by his mother's zeal a Christian bred:
'Iue to his faith, he loll his father's throne.
W\!llt fays lie of ALONZO ?

Seb. Sent by him,

The brave ABDALLAH comes to fight for Spain.
They march'd together, from the falls of Nile
To Damietta. There, a wound, receiv'd

In Asia's wars, broke out; and forc'd ALONZO,
Full of regret, in Egypt to remain.
His friend for him appears. The KING, thy father,
With all his peers, in honour of the prince,
Go forth to meet him.

Orm. Iaft thou seen ALBERTO ?

Scb. I have, and told him what I had in charge;

Then hasten'd hither to r;port these tidings,
At which ALBERTO6 droops.

Ter. Return, I pray,

To my apartment guide the young ALBERTO.
The princess will be there. [Exit SEBASTIAN,

Did not I fay,

A.LONZO never would abandon Spain ?
ABDALLAIl comes to conquer in his name.
Now I can read the characters of fate,
And spell the will of heav'n. This boy of yours
Will win your hufland back. When he beholds
The image of his valour so express,
His heart will melt. The husband and the father
Will rufl upon him with a flood ofjoy.

Ormt. Is he not like him ? Mark his coming forth !

Behlol ALONZO in his daring son!
Full of the spirit of his warlike fire,

is birth unknown, he felt his princely mind,

Advanc'd undaunted on the edge of war,
And claim'd the post of danger for his own.

Ter. A m)ther's tongue cannot exceed the truth

In praising him. " There never was a prince,
" Since old Iberia fir2t excell'd in arms,
"Broke out with so much lustre on mankind."
But in this interview " with prudence check
" The transport of affeaion from thy son."

Cautious

# ACT III.

Cautious conceal the secret of his birth.
Safest he is while to himself unknown.

Orm. How could his faithful guardian let him go ?
Perhaps the brave COSTOLLO lives no more.

T'r. ALBERTO will inform thee.

Orm. Not ALBERTO
ALONZO is his namc. I go to meet him. [E.eunt.

Ei.d of the SECOND ACT,

AC T III
SCENE, A View of the Counttry near the,

City.

Enter ABDALLAH.
Abd. ! CITY ! once the feat of all I lov'd.!'

0J 0 ! hills and dales! haunts of my youthful
days!

O ! scenes well known ! urialter'd you remain.
But I approach you with an.alter'd mind,
Hate. what I lov'd, and loath what I defir'd;
Intolerable state ! My foul is void-!
A chaos without form. Why, nature, why-!
Art thou so watchful o'er the brutal tribes,
And yet so careless of the human race..
By certain inftind beasts and birds discern
Their proper food: For them the fairest fruit
Untouch'd, if pois'nous, withers on the bough:
But man, by a fair'outfide, still deceiv'd,
And by his boalted reason more betray'd,

Gives

Gives the affeiton of his. foul to beauty,
Devours the deadly bane.

Enter VELASCO.

Vel. My Lord ! Thy people,
Where thou commandedll, halt, and wait thy coming.

AIbd. 'Tis well ! I wiih'd to speak with thee alone.

VELASCO ! tho' to thee but lhttlc known,
I did in part reveal my secret foul,
Told thee the seig.'d AEL:.ALLrA was ALONZO.
Further than that, thou hall not fought to know,
Tho' many a lonely hour we two have worn
On sea and fiore, that lome men would have thought
rvolt opportune.

Vel. AMy Lord ! There are some men

Who having once been trusted with a little,
Avail themielves of that, some more to learn,
And penetrate the bosom of a friend,
Even with the wedge his eafines had furnifh'd-
Such men Ihould not be truiied.

4bd. True, VELASCO !

But thou art not like them: I have obferv'd thee,
Warm in affection, but in temper cool:
A steady judgl:nent guides thee thro' the world.
Thy gen'rous mind pursues the path of honour,
Unbiafs'd and unmov'd.

el. " From early youth,

" The chosen confident of my companions,"
I never yet from perfidy betray'd,
From babbling vanity, divulg'd a secret.

-Abd. I have a tale to tell, that will amaze,

Confound, and ifrikc thee dumb. The deserts vast
Of Alia and of Africa have heard it.

The

The rocky cliffi of Caucasus and Atlas
?lave echo'd my complaints: But never yet
The human ear recciv'd them. " Thou haft heard
" Already more than ever mortal did."
Thou know'ft the Princess ?

VCI. ORMISINDA ?

Abd. Her.

Tel/. N0t many of the court hlave been more honour'd

\','it opportunities to know her worth
A.d there is none who more her worth reveres.

_d1b. Her worth! Thou may'lt as well revere a fiend

The blackest fiend, that dwells in burning hell,
Is not more opposite to all that's good
Than ORMISINDA.

Vel. What a firain is this ?

Ald. 'Tis true, by every high and holy name,

Tl1at binds a soldier's and a princc's vow:
I f5'eCar, VELASCO, she's the vilest woman
'Tnat e'er difgrac'd her fcx. The moll abandoned,
Thle hardieft, mofl determin'd in her vice,
That ever wrong'd a fond believing heart.

" Pel. Great God !

" Abd. You flart and shudder like a' man
"Stiruck with a heavy blow.

" Vel. And so I am.

" bd. And now you lift your eye-lids up and flare

'" WYithl looks full of conjeaur'e and fufpiciop,
" As ilf you doubted of my fcber mind.
,I r am not mad, VELASCO, tho' sometimes
" I have been near, yes, very near to madncfs;
'; By that bad woman craz'd."

Vel. 0 ! Would to heav'n !
That this aRfi'iing moment of my life

Were

Were a delirious dream! " Unreal all
" That's heard and spoken now !" But how, my Lord,
Art thou so much affected by her crimes ?

.bd. I am her huiband.

Vel. Heav'n for that be prais'd !

Abd. How dar'f thou thus profane the name of heav'n,

And mock my misery ? " Thou art mad, I think;
" The frenzy which thouwifhcd'Rfhas ccmc upon thee."
Beware, for if this extafy endures,
My sword secures thy silence.

Vel.' ! forgive me,

Noble ALONzo, royal, I nlould fay,
Doubly my mafler now. There's not a man,
Whose veins contain one drop of Spanifli blood,
Who does not wilh thee wedded to the princess.
And for her virtue ! Thou haft long been absent,
And know'fl not what an angel's life flue leads !
Referv'd, rctir'd, and fad. I'll flake my foul,
Some villain has belied thy faithful wife,
And fnar'd thy easy faith.

Aid. Take heed, take heed !

I am the villain who accuse the Princess,
And thou lhalt be her judge.

iel. Eternal power
What flall I think of this ?

Abd. Liftcn to me.

I have perplex'd thee, and have marr'd the flory
By my abruptncrs. 'Tis a serious story,
Not to be told in parcels and by flarts,
As I from impotence of mind began;
But I will bear m fivelling paflion down,
And utter all my fnaime Thou dost remember
Howl I was baniih'd from my native land!

17c1.

Vd. For killing young Ramirez.

.Ibd. At that time

I doated on the Princess. She conjur'd me
With earneri pray'rs, with deluges of tears,
NIot to refii her father, 'nor advance
My better title to the crown of Spain,
As I had once refolv'd. My rage the footh'd;
Pr;de, anger, int'reft, yielded all to love.
With her I made a merit of obedience,
And pleaded so effecually my cause,
Thi:t fl;e confented-to a private marriage,
Before I left the kingdom. We were married,
And met together, four successive nights,
In the fequefter'd cottage of the wood,
Behind the palace garden. 0 ! I thought
MIyfelf the happiest and the moll belov'd
Of all mankind. She mock'd me all the while;
Meant me the cover of her loose amours,
A cloak to hide her ihame. O God ! O God !
Did I deserve no better ?

Vel. Good, my Lord!

What circumstance to warrant such conclusion .
What evidence ?

A^d. The evidence of fight-
Mine eyes beheld: I saw myself difhonour'd.

Vel. Your eyes beheld !

Abd. By heav'n and hell-they did.

The night preceding the appointed day
Of my departure from the realm of Spain,
I flew impatient to the place of meeting,
Before the hour was come : To wear away
The tedious time, for ev'ry minute feem'd
An age to me, I struck into the wood

E And

And wander'd there, itill rtlfering to the gate
By which (he was to enter. Thro' the trees,
The moon, full orb'd, in all her glory (hone.
My am'rous mind a sportful purpose form'd,
Unseen to watch the coming of my bride,
And wantonly i'trprize her. Near the gate
There flood an agcd tree. It was a beech,
V. hich far and wide lirctch'd forth its level arms
Low, near the ground, and form'd a gloomy shade.
Behind its trunk I took my secret tfand;
The gate was full in view, and the green path
On which it open'd. There I flood a while,
And soon I heard the turning of the key.
My heart beat thick with joy-and forth she came:-
Not as I wisl'd: She had a minion with her
A handsome youth was tripping by her fide,
Girt with a sword, and dreis'd in gay attire.
He feem'd to court her, as they pass'd along,
Coy, but not angry, for I heard her laugh.
She flung away. He follow'd, soon o'ertook her,
Embrac'd her-

Vel. Ah ! The Princess ORMISINDA !

Abd. I drew my sword, that I remember well,

And then an interval like death ensued.
'When confcioufinec! returned, I found myself
Stretch'l at my length upon the " naked" ground
Under the tree: " My sword lay by my fide."
The sudden (hock, the transport of my rage,
And grief, had flopt the current of my blood,
And made a paufl. of life.

Vel. Alas ! my Lord !

'Twas piteous indeed. What did'ft thou do,
\When life and fenCe return'd ?

AU.

Abd. With life and sense,

My rage return'd. Stumbling with haste, I ran
To sacrifice them to my just revenge.
But whether they had heard my " heavy" fall,
Or that my death-like swoon had lasted long,
1 knowh not, but I never saw them more.
I fearch'd till morning; then away I went,
Refolv'd to scorn the firumpet, and forget her.
But I have not been able to forget
MNor to despise her ; tho' I hate her more
Than e'er I lov'd her, frill her image haudts me
'llWere'er I go. I think of nothing else
When I'm awake, and never flhut my eyes
But flle's the certain vision of my dream.
Sometimes, in all.her loveliness she comes
Without her crimes: In extafy I wake,
And wifl the vision had endur'd for ever.
For these deceitful moments, 0 ! my friend !
Are the sole pleasant moments which ALONZO
For eighteen years has known.

Vel. Within that time,

What regions barbarous haft thou explor'd,
What strange viciflitudes of life endur'd
In acion and repose.

Abd. Extremes of both

I courted to relieve my tortur'd mind:
But the tormerntor still rmy fleps attends
" Behind me mounts, when thro' the ranks of war
"I drive my fiery freed; and when I seek
" The hermit's cell, the fiend pursues me there."
Time, which they fay the wounds of paflion cures
In other hearts, inflames and fefiers mine.
There's but one remedy.

E 2 Vl.

Vel. Would I could name one !

Abd. Her life. The un&tion for the serpent's bite;

Is the fell serpent's blood. I'll have her life.
Th' adult'refs with infamy liall die,
By public juftlie doom'd. W ith this intent
Difguis'd I come. If in my proper shape
I had appear'd, alarm'd she would have fled,
And basl'd my revenge.

" Va. My Lord, permit me
"One thing to mention, which these eyes beheld,

Altho' it squares not just with thy opinion.
"'; Ad. Opinion!

" Vel. Good my Lord ! with patience hear.

" When first I was to this employment nam'd,
" Which since I have so happily difcharg'd,
" The Princess sent and call'd me to her presence.
; The treaty with the Moor engrofs'd-her thoughts.
" That fad and pensive air fle always wears,
"Was fettled to a thicker gloom of grief.
" Her vo;ce '.2as low and languid. Few her words,
': And the short periods ended with a sigh.
" Eit wvhen I gave her hopes of thy return,
" A sudden gleam of joy fplread o'er her face,

Like nmrning breaking in a cloudy sky.

(' Wt'ith ealneft voice, fill-rifing as flie spoke,
" She urg'd dispatch, exhorted me to zeal
"; And perseverance. Never to defifs
" Till I had found thee: For her fate, flIe said,
" The fate of Spain, depended on ALONZO.
" Her pallion then burat in a flood of tears
" Tlat choak'd her utterance.

" Abd. And thou didit believe
"' That ev'ry word mhe spoke was most sincere,

" How.;

"How to interpret her let me inftruA thee.
" Whate'er she utters with unusual warmth,
"As the effusion genuine of her heart,
" Receive and construe in another sense
" Reverse and opposite; for that's the truth.
" The words ihe spoke, her sighs, the tears fie shed,

Were all from apprehension of my coming,
"Not as they feem'd, for fear I flould not come.

" Vel. 'Tis dreadful that.

" Abd. 'Tis horrible, 'tis monstrous!
" When I for her had wav'd my right to reign,

The right undoubted of the Gothic line,

" And ftoop'd, enamour'd, to that base decree
"From Spain, which banilh'd the true heir of Spain,
" That flie flould pitch on me to be her fool,
" And pour such infinite contempt upon me.
" But four days married ! Fond, to madness fond !
" And on the very eve of my departure !
"She would not for a single day refrain,
"But rull'd to prostitution !

" Vl. I have heard

"Stories and tales enough of female falihood,
"Some that were true, and others that were feign'd,
" By spiteful wits maliciously devis'c.

But this surpasses all.

" ibd. All wicked women,

" Compar'd with her, are faints. 'She is a foil
' To set them off, and make their foulness fair.
" In her incontinence (le tands unrivall'd,

Burning in fires peculiar to herself,
Phutnix in lewdness."

/el. May I alk my Lord
How he intends ?-But fee, the KING draws'near.

E 3 Abd.

Abd. He's much impair'd.

'el. When fore affli&ion comes

In the decline of life, 'tis like a tform,
'Which, in the rear of autumn, fllakes the tree
That frost had touch'd before; and itrips it bare
Of all its leaves.

Enter the KING with attendants.
(" As he advances, speaks to VELASCO."):

King. " We thank thy care. VELASCO !"
(To ARDALLAH) Illustrious Prince ! whom love of glory

brings

From regions so remote, to fight for Spain,
Accept the thanks a grateful nation pays
To her defender.

Aid. Monarch of Afturia.

The nations of the East have heard thy praise.
Had not the hand of time unstrung thine arm,
Spain never would have fought for foreign. aid
To quell her foes.

Kling. " 'Tis better far for Spain

" That I am old: For" in my vwalike days,
When in the prime of flov'ring youth I fought,
I equall'd not thy friend. " Above his own,
" Above the itrength of ev'ry mortal arm.
.' ALONZO thine exalts."

.ud. " Three times we fought

"With equal fortune on the Wolga's banks
" He for the Monguls, I againfl them flood.
" But at our last encounter, on my helm
" His faithless blade broke short, and in his hand-
" The useless hilt remain'd. My fwiord I dropt,
" And in my arms the valiant chief embrac'd.

· Our

" Our friendship thus commenc'd, and since that' time
"5 We have been brothersfworn; and leagu'd in arms.',
ALONZO, fighting in my cause, receiv'd
That wound which now detains him from the field..
Urg'd by affecion, and by honour.bound,.
For him I come against the foes of Spain..
But of myself more than enough is said;
'Tis time to a&. The Moorilh.knight, I hear,
Is in the lifts already..

King. Prince of Persia I
The terms to.thee are known.

Abd. The first of men

With pride such honours might from Spain receive;
But never can there honours grace ABDALLAH.
Long since my heart and hand were giv'n away;
And tho' the custom of the East permits
Unnumber'd contorts, me my faith restrains..
But if vidorious in the strife of death,
I have an earnest and a just request
To thee, 0 KING ! which, at a proper time,
I fiall be bold to make.

King. " Whate'er it is,"
I pledge my honour and my faith, to grant it.

Enter SEBASTIAN and ALBERTO.

(ALBERTO goes on to the KING.)

King. Advance, ALBERTO ! to the Prince himself,
Deliver thou thy meflage and the present.

A/b. Great Sir! the Princess ORMISINDA greets

The gen'rous champion of her country's cause,
Wiilles that viclory may fit to-day,
And ev'ry day of battle, on his sword.
This cosily bracelet from her arm she fends.

To

To Prince ABDALLAH, to ALONZG'S friend.

Abd. (LookingJledfajtlj on ALBERTO.)

The Princess is most bountiful, as thou,
Who haft the honour to attend her, know'It.
Her gracious present humbly I accept,
And thank her for her goodness to ALONZO,
XWho will be proud to be by her remember'd..
The combat ended, I propose to pay
Mty homage to her beauty. At this time
My mind is in the iifts.-The Moorifli knight
Will think me tardy. (To the KING.)

King. Let our trumpets found

A sprightly charge. The warrior's heart beats time
To that brave music. Onward from this place
A path direEt to thy pavilion leads.

(The KING turns and gives orders.)
Abd. [to VELASCO.] Another minion ! View him well,

VELASCO.

How insolent ! See what a crest he rears,
Elated with her favour. 0 ! vile woman !
Insatiate and inconflant.

Vel. Ah ! my Lord !

Truce with such thoughts ! Sure this is not a time !
The combat claims a cool and present mind.

,bd. Fear not the combat.

/el. Thou art waited for;
The KINGS himself intends with thee to walk.

[Excunt: ABDALLA1H looking back atAlLBrERTO.]

Manent ALBERTO, SEBASTIAN.

A/b. That prince of Persia is compos'd of pride;

He did not deign to look upon the present,
But fretcihd his sun-burnt hand 1traight out before him,

Like

Like a blind man, and would have flood so till,
Had I not made his fingers feel the pearls.
And all the while he ftar'd me in the face,
As if he meant t'opprefs me with his eye,
And fright me with his fierce and uncouth looks.-
I blufh'd at first, but anger came at last,
And bore me up..

Seb. Those priices of the East,

Us'd to the servile manners of their country,
Where ev'ry proflrate slave adores his lord,
Without intention ihock the sons of Europe.

.ilb. 0 ! how unlike to him the King of Spain,.

And that most gentle Princess, OR.MISINDA !
" Her look, her voice, benign and mild, dispel
" The awe her rank inspires, and reassure
" The modefi mind.' Would'f thoubelieve, SEBASTIArN,
She talk'd to me, I calinot tell how long,
Before thou cani'll, and queftion'd me minutely
How I had liv'd, how pall my youthful days ?
I fear I was too copious in my answers..
MWhat signifies my rural life to her !
And yet flie feem'd to liften with delight,.
As if she had an int'reft in my fate;
And once or twvice, when I of danger spoke,.
From which I hardly had efcap'd with life,
Iethought I saw her tremble. Much she blam'd:
Mvy rafhners; yet flhe prais'd my courage too.
With all her tenderness of heart, I fee
That lie admires true valour..

Seb. 'So she does.

The braveit knight that e'er was clad in fieel,
AiLOzo, was the lover of her youth:
!Atl since he left this land flie ne'er rejoic'd..

But

# ACT IV.

But of these matters I will tell thee more
At a convenient season. Let us follow,
And join the train before they reach the lifts.

Y./b. I would not lose one moment of this fight

For half the lands of Spain. Tho' I abhor
The Persian, yet I pray devoutly for him. [Exeuit

End of the TiuRD ACT.

'AC T IV.

SCENE, The City.

Enter OrasINDA and TERESA.
Orm. T HIS city looks as if a peflilence

-i- Had fvept the whole inhabitants away.

The solitary streets, the empty squares,
Appall me more than the deserted palace.
" Let us go back again.

"Ter. 'Tis time we flould.

"You tremble at the lhowling of a dog,
" That broke the filetcc and incrcas'd the horror.
" If we Lay here we hc all be fancy-ftruck,
" Miftlike some flatue for a L.:le-fac'd ghost,
" And think it beckons rwih its marble arm.

Orm. " Whrlv lhould this dcfolation frighten me ?

" Why rnould I fear to fee a grave-clad ghofl,
" Who may so soon be number'd with the dead,
" And be myself a ghofl ?" What noise is that?
Did'il thou not hear, TERESA ?

Tcr. " Yes, I did,"

i

I heard an uncouth found.

Orn. Uncouth indeed!
An universal groan ! Hark ! there again.

Ter. 'Tis not the fame. This has another tone,
A shout of tliumphl, and a burst of joy.

Orim. The combat's over, and my fate's determin'd.
Now death or life ! [The trumpets found.

7er. Long may the Princess live !

And every hour be fortunate as this !
The Spanllih trumpets found, the sign I know.
Thy champion has prcvail'd.

Orm. 0 gracious heav'n!
The lifts are near, and we lhall quickly learn.

Ter. Look yonder, flying swifter than the wind,

A horseman comes; now at the gate he lights,
And haftes across the square. It is SEBASTIAN.
His look, his geflure, speak his tidings good.

Enter SEBASTIAN.

Scb. Joy to the Princess! Vi&ory and peace !
The Moor is slain by brave ABDALLAH's hand.

Orm. Blest be thy tongue, SEBASTIAN ! Thou flialtfind

Some better recompence than barren thanks
For these glad tidings. But the gen'rous Prince
Who %'ught for Spain-

Seb. Safe and without a wound,

Frehfl for another foe, ABDALLAIH ifands.
Short was the combat: Soon the boaster fell,
Who durst defy the Chriffian world to arms.

Orm. The God of battles, hvom ABDALLAH serves,

Has overthrown the infidel, whose trust
WTas in his own right arm.

Seb. If I fliould live

Ten

Ten thousand years, I never could forget
The solemn prelude and the fierce encounter.
Thou know'ft the place appointed for the combat,
An amphitheatre by nature form'd.

Orm. I know it well.

Seb. " The hills, of various fope

" And shape, Wihich circle round the spacious plain,
" Were cover'd with a multitude immense
" Of either sex, of every age and rank,
" Christian and Moor; whose faces and attire
"Strangely diversified the living scene."
Witllin the lilts a galleiy was rais'd,
In which thy father and the Moorifl prince
Sat with their peers, the judges of the field.
To them the knights with flow and flatcly pace
Approach'd; and, bound by sacred oaths, declar'd
That they no charm nor incantation us'd,
But trusted in their valour and their arms.
With low obeisance then they both fell back i
And first the Moor (for he the challenge gave)
March'd to the middle of the lifted field;
There seiz'd his ponderous mace, " beneath whose

'" weight,

" The brawny bearer bow'd ; and round his head,
" Like a light foil, he flourifh'd it in air."
On him with diff'rent thoughts the nations gaz'd.
But suddenly a flash of light and flame
Struck every eye from brave ABDALLAI'S fllield,
Cover'd till then. " 'Twas made of pqlifli'd fleel,
" Which shone like adamant; and to a point
" Rose in the centre, slanting on each fide."
This shield, the Persian Prince advancing, bore
On his left arm outtlretch'd, and in his right,

Thrown

Thrown back a little, gleam'd a pointed sword.
Eret and high the bold Mirmallon stood,
And sternly ey'd his near.approaching foe.
They forward sprung, and on the flaming flield
Difcharg'd a mighty blow, enough to crufl
A wall, or split a rock. The Spaniards gave
A general groan.

Orm. That was the dreadful fould
We heard, TERESA.

Seb. Glancing from the shield,

Aside the mace descended. Then enrag'd,
Once more the Moor his thund'ring weapon rear'd.
In ftept the Prince, and raising high his shield,
Midway he met the blow; "and with the strength
"And vigour of his arm, obliquely down
" The pond'rous mace he drove." Then quick as

thought,

His better hand and, foot at once advancing,
Plung'd in Mirmallon's throat his thirsty blade.
"The giant ftagger'd for a little space 5
" Then falling, (hook the earth." The Chriftiansrais'd
A fllout that rep+ the air. Away I came,
Happy to be the bearer of such tidings. [Tru-mpet.

Orm. Behold, they come in triumph from the field.

0 ! glorious man ! And yet forgive me, heav'n,
I grudge the conquest to ALONzo's friend,
And wlih-ALONZo in ABDALLAH'S place.

Enter the KING, ABDALLAH, VELASCO, ALBERTO, &C.
[Al.d. to Vel.] See where she stands. O heav'ns!

Vel. My Lord " ALONZO,"
Compose thy thoughts.

Abd. Behold her how (he looks,

F As

As if fle knew no ill. 'That harden'd heart
Against remorse and fear and ihame is arm'd;
But I shall wring it now.

King. Daughter, draw near !

This godlike Prince all recompence disclaims,
Save thanks from Spain. The pleasing talk be thine
To greet the saviour of thy native land,
And speak our gratitu:le.

Orm. No words can speak

The gratitude I feel. Believe it great
As my deliverance, vast as my diRlrefs!
Like fad Andromeda, chain'd to the rock
I flood a living prey, when this brave Prince,
Came like another Perseus from the sky,
And fav'd me from dcflru&ion. I forget,
Wrapt in myself, the charge my father gave
To thank the saviour of my native land ;
Another voice Ihall give thee thanks for Spain,
ALONZO'S voice shall thank thee for his country,
His friends, his people-fav'd.

Adbd. Ah ! If I hear

This syren longer, file will charm my rage;
But I remember where I heard her last. [AJfde.
Princess of Spain ! I merit not thy praise.
Sent-by ALONZO to this land I came:
What has been done, for him I have perform'd.
Now of his promise I remind the KING
To grant me one request.

King. Speak ! It is granted.

"Orm. If I conje&ure right, even that request
" Will prove one favour more on Spain conferr'd.

Abd. Perhaps it may."

King. Proceed, illustrious Prince !

And

And make me happy to fulfill thy with.

Abd. Not for myself I speak, but for my friend;

And in his name, whose person I fultain,
I ask for justice on a great offender.

King. Thou flalt have. ample and immediate juflice.

Nor favour nor affinity (hall fkreen
The guilty person. Prince, why art thou troubled ?
Thou fliak'ft from head to foot. Thy quiv'ring lip
Is pale with passion. On thy forehead Rtand
Big drops. Almighty God ! What dreadful birth
Do these firong pangs portend ?

.bd. The guilty person,

Whom with a capital offence I charge,
Stands by thy fide.

King. My daughter!

Abd. Yes ! thy daughter !

'Tis her I mean, the Princess ORMISINDA.
Here in the presence of the peers of Spain,
I charge her with a crime, ,hoCe doom the laws
Of Spain have wrote in blood: Adultery.
I read astonishment in ev'ry face !
Who would fufpet that one so highly born,
With ev'ry outward mark of virtue grac'd,
Had giv'n her honour to a worthless wretch,
And driv'n a noble huffand to despair !

King. Am I awake! Is this the light of day ?

Art thou, 0 ! Prince, with sudden frenzy seiz'd?
Or is the madness mine ? Renown'd ABDALLAI !
What answer can be made to such a charge ?
This strange demand of justice on my daughter,
For an offence that lhe could not commit ?
My daughter ne'er was married.

Aibd. ARk her that!
F 2 Iear:

Hear if fle ,will.deny 'fle has a hubfand !

King. My child, thou art amaz'd !

Orm. No, not so much

As thou wilt be, my father, when thou hear'st
Thy daughter's tongue confess she has a husband.

King. Hall thou a husband! God of heav'n and earth !
Since thou haft thus dissembled with thy father,
Perhaps thou hall deceiv'd thy husband too.
Who is thy husband ? Speak !

Orm. The Prince ALONZO.

King. And half thou been so long in secret wedded.
'Tis eighteen years since he departed hence.

Orm. ! I have reason to remember that.

There is no calendar so just and true
As the fad mem'ry of a wife forsaken.
The years, the months, the weeks, the very days,
Are reckon'd, regifter'd, recorded there !
And of that period I could cite such times,
So dolorous, distressful, melancholy,
That the bare mention of them would excite
Amazement how I live to tell the tale.
· But I forget the present in the pat.
" Now wonder, for this moment is the first
" That opes the sluices of a heart o'ercharg'd,
"And burRing with a flood of grief conceal'd."
But I must turn me to another theme.
The earneftleyes of all are bent on me,
Watching my looks, and prying to discern
Symptoms of innocence or signs of guilt.
Hear then the frank confession of my foul:
I have tranfgrefs'd.

King. Stain of a noble race.
Dost thou avow thy crime

Orm.

Orm. Mitlake me not,

I have tranfgrefs'd my duty to my father:
Without his knowledge, and against his will,
Mov'd by a tender lover's parting tears,
I join'd myself in wedlock to ALONZO.
MVy KING, my father, pardon the offence,
Which against thee I own I have committed:
But may I ne'er of God or man be pardon'd,
Nor friend nor father ever pity me,
If I have fwerv'd one ftep from virtue's path,
Or broke the smallest parcel of that vow
Which binds a faithful wife O ! Prince of Persia
Thou art the best of friends and benefators;
Thou comr't to end my most diftrating woes,
And to dispel th' impenetrable cloud
That darken'd all my days. Now I ihall know
Why I have been abandon'd and forsaken,
Why I have been detested and defpis'd,
As never woman was. Proceed, my Lord.
And whilst thou keenly dolt assail my life,
And, dearer far, my honour and my fame,.
Secure in innocence, I'll calmly hear.
From thee,. I hope the end'of all my cares.-

Abd. Even thus ALONZO told me she would speak,.
And thus proclaim her innocence.

Orm. Did he ?

O ! -would to heav'n ALONZO heard me now,
Fearless defend his honour and my own !
"My voice, which once was music to his ear,
"Like David's harp which footh'd the gloomy king,
" Would charm his malady, would drive away
- The evil spirit, and call back again
" The better genius of his early days."'

3 - O!

O ! thou that wert so good, so great ! admir'd
Of all mankind ! my lov'd, my loR ALONZO !
For thee, in this humiliating hour,
More than myself I mourn,

Abd. (IIalf afde.) Eternal Power'

To who m the secrets of all hearts are known I
Hear, hear this woman, and between us judge !
'Tis not my business to contend with words,
" These are the conquering arms of womankind."
A nobler course of trial lies before me:
In a wrong'd husband's name I charge this lady
With infidelity; and crave the doom
Of law upon her head. If any knight,
Spaniard or firanger, dares aflert her cause,
Let him stand forth, and take my gauntlet up;
Which on the ground I throw, my gage to prove
That fle is false to honour and ALONZO.

Orm. Before the gage of death is lifted up,.

Ilear me one moment. By ALONzo sent,
Thou com'f inftruccd in ALONZo's wrongs.
Let me conjure thee then, by all that's dear,
By all that's sacred to the great and brave,
" Thy mother's memory, thy consort's fame,"
Not on a gen'ral charge, obscure and vague,
To which there is no anjfwcr but denial,
To found the claim of combat: Single out
What circumfiance thou wilt of special note,
Of such a kind as may be tried and known
For true or false. Tell us at least his name
With whom ALONZo'S wife her honour ftain'd,
-And let us be confronted.

[Y'zng AIBERTO /Jeps forth.

A/b. Heav'n forbid

Tha'

That thou should'st be confronted with a villain.
Princess of Spain! Be sure some wretch there is,
Some renegado, false to God and man,
Suborn'd, and ready with a lying tongue,
To second this brave Prince who wrongs thy fame,
And wounds thy modest car. Too much by far
Already thou haft heard. " Pretended Prince !

For there is nothing royal in thy foul !'

Thou base defamer of a lady's name !
I take thy gauntlet up, " and hold it high
" In scorn, and fierce defiance, to thy face,"
MBy gage to prove thy accusation false,
And thee, the author of a tale invented
To rob a noble lady of her fame.

Orm. Where am Inow ? WhatfhallI do, " TERESA ?"

AJ4fde.
" Ter." The god of heav'n direc " thee !" [me!]

Abd. Boy,! To thee

I answer nothing. I fufpet the cause
Of thy presumption, and could wish that Spain
Had giv'n a worthier viAcim to my sword. [TYalks afdde

Orm. 0 ! valiant youth ! much am I bound to- thee:

But I have reasons that import the state,
Which shall, whatever is my fate, be known,
A.nd own'd hereafter to be great and weighty,
Why I decline th' aflifianc. of thy sword.
If this appeal to combat is the law,
And I. can find no champion but ALBERTO,
Without the chance of combat let me fall,
For I will not accept-

Alb. Recall these words,

Too gen'rous Princess ! I can read thy thoughts:
Thou think'ft my youth unequal to the foe;

Thou

Thou fear'ft the weakness of ALBERTO'S arm.
" My firength exceeds the promise of my years.
" Oft' have I bent the bow, and drawn the sword,.
" Nor fly my shafts, nor falls my fwvord in vain.
" This day againit a troop alone I fought;"
But never did I fight in such a cause,
Nor was I e'er so certain to prevail.
" A fire divine invades my zealous breast:
" I feel the force of legions in mine arm."
Thy innocence has made thy champion firong!
The God of battle is our righteous judge;
And let the cause be tried.
(A WARRIOR armed, with his he/met on, Jfeps forth.)

War. But not by thee !

Thy father's voice forbids, too daring youth ;
Stand back, and let thy mailer in the art
Of war, now claim the combat for his own.
My liege !

King. That voice I know: Thy figure too

Resembles much a chief, lamented long
As slain in battle.

War. I am he, CosTOLLo.

" 'Tis true, O ! KING ! that on the field I fell,
" Fighting for Spain." How I was fav'd from death,
And where, for many years I have remain'd,
This is no time to tell. This hour demands
A soldier's speech, brief prologue to his deeds.
On me, proud Persian ! turn thy gloomy eyes;
Hear me, and let thy ready sword reply.
With hell-born malice, level'd at her life,
Thou haft defam'd a Princess, honour'd, lov'd,
By all, who virtue or fair honour love.

" Thp

" The fell Hytena, native of thy land,
"Has not a voice or heart more false than thine,"
Thou counterfeit of truth ! whom I defy
To mortal combat, and the proof of arms.
Thy full-blown fame, thy unexhaufled strength,
Deceitful confidence, I laugh to scorn;
The conquering cause is mine.

Alb. My lord, the KING L

And ye his counsellors for wisdom fam'd!
You will not sure permit this good old man,
By fond affestion for his son impell'd,
To meet so lern a foe. " His hoary head,
" His wither'd veins, are symptoms of decay."
Lean not upon a reed which time hath bruis'd,
Nor trust the life and honour of the Princess
To the weak arm of age.

Abd. " I'll fight you both,

" Father and son at once." Together come,
Tongue-valiant men! and try ABDALLAH'S arm.
I'll have it so; for both of you have dar'd,
Ignoblo as you are, to match yourselves
Against a Prince who moves not in your sphere,.
And utter words for which such blood as yours
Is poor atonement.

CoJ. Evry word thod fpeak'ft

Is insolent and false. " Son of a slave !
" For eastern monarchs buy with gold their brides,"
The blood by thee defpis'd, flows from a source
Purer than thine and nobler.

A/b. Nay, my father!

That's said too far. Fierce and disdainful Printe,
Vain is the offer which thy paflion makes.
Perhaps the conqu'ror of the Mloor may find

One

One Spaniard ts enough.

"Cos. A father's right

"Unmov'd I claim, and with determin'd voice
" Forbid the combat."

King. Hence let us retire

To the pavillion. There our peers ihall judge
Of your pretensions. [Exeunt KING and Spaniards..

Abd. Come with me, iVELASCO.

[Exeunt ABDALLAH and VELASCO.

IManent ORMISINDA and TERESA.

Orm. My thoughts are of my son. Mine own estate

Is defp'rate. The huffand whom I lov'd,
On whom I doated, " and from whom I fuffer'd,
" What never woman with such patience bore,"
Conspires againit my honour and my life.
Long cherifh'd hope, farewell !

Ter. To guard thy son

Defend thyself; and, to prevent the combat,
In thy demand persist. Call the accuser
To circumffance of proof. That is the thread
To lead us thro' this labyrinth perplex'd.
Nor has the Persian thy demand refus'd.

Orm. He had not time to speak. ALBERSTOS voice

Broke in like thunder in his mother's cause.
Amidst the anguish of my tortur'd heart,
My foul exults, TERESA ! in my son !
When in the pride of valour forth he came,
And for my fake defied the bold ABDALLAH,
His look (he feem'd a cherub in my eyes !)
His voice (at every word my bosom yearn'd !)
Transported me so much, that I forgot
His fate and mine, and had well nigh fplung forth

To

To clasp my blooming hero in my arms.

Ter. No wonder that his mother's foul was mov'd:

His brave demeanour the fpedators charm'd.
Valour, which (hades a glory round the head
Of age and ruggedness; how bright its beams
When in the lovely front of youth they ihine!

Orm. I've heard of strange and perilous essays

To try the pureness of fufpe&ied virtue.
I'll undergo whate'er can be devis'd.
" By ordeal trial let my faith be prov'd.
,' Blindfold, barefooted, on the fmoaking foil,
" With red-hot plough-lharesfpread, I'll walk myway;
" Plunge in the boiling oil my naked arm,"
But will not risk my young ALONZO'S life.
The Moorish host hangs o'er our heads no more.
The heir of Spain shall for himself be known,
ALONzo's son.

Ter. He will not be allowd.

ALONzo's son, nor yet the heir of Spain,
Whili slander's breath sullies his mother's fame.

Orm. Now thou hail touch'd a firing, to ivhofe deep

found

A mother's heart replies. My son! my son !
I weigh thy virtues down, hang on thy life,
Attaint thy blood, thy birth, thy right to reign !
The birds of prey that dwell among the rocks,
The savage beasts that thro' the deserts roam,
The monfrers of the deep, their offspring love,
And to preserve their lives devote their own.
Athwart the gloom, I fee a flash of light,
That opens the hprizon. I descry
M. hand that points a high and lofty path

Which

# ACT V.

Which I will boldly tread. Now to my father.
Upon my knees his aid I'll first implore. - [Exeunt.

End of the FOURTH ACT.

AC T V.
SCE NE, the City, a s jbr e.

ABDALLAH and VELASCO.
Yel. .'REFORE this day fhle ne'er beheld the boy.

Far from this place, in Catalonia bred,

He came to fee the famous combat fought.
;Twas he, my Lord, who flew the Mooriflh chief,
And in his own defence such wonders wrought.
That aaion to the Plincefs made him known,
The reft in honour of his valour follow'd.

" /bd. How dost thou know -

" e/l. With admiration itruck,

" When he flood forth and brav'd a foe, like thee,
" Of divers persons curious I enquir'd,
" Who, and from whence he was."

Abd. Pity it were

To hurt the stripling. 'Tis a noble boy.
I love the outbreak of his Spanish fire
Againfl the Moors.

Vel. Ay, and against ABDALLAH,

"' Whom antient fame and recent glory rais'd
"' Above all mortal men." Spare this young plant,
Who makes so fair a shoot.

.4bd.

lbd. How can I spare him ?

Should their ele&ion fend him to my sword,
How, good VELASCO ?

Vel. When the peers return,

The KING, the Princess, ,with their champion chosen,
Then to the wond'ring audience, in the face
Of her that's guilty, let my Lord relate
The truth-mark'd Riory he to me has told.
Deteaed thus, confounded and furpris'd,
Pierc'd with a thousand eyes, that gaze upon her,
And dart conviction; can lie fill deny,
And by denial, make her guilt ambiguous
But if her sex's genius is so frong,
That (le the port of innocence maintains,
And, from the fullness and excess of vice,
Derives a boldness, that may look like virtue,
Then let the sword decide.

Aid. What you propose

Is worth the trial. I am loth to spill
The young ALBERTO'S or COSTOLLO's blood:
For they deserve no harm. Ev'n you, my friend,
Before my hand unclafp'd the book of Ihame,
Her champion would have been.

/,l. Against the world.

" Abd. I will adopt the counsel of VELASCO,

"And probe more deeply fill her fefter'd minbd.
" I fee 'tis better that (ie ihould confers
".Her guilt; than with her yanquifh'd champion fall,
"By doom of law, protesting to the las
" Her innocence.

" Vl. Better a thousand times.

"Her dying voice would shake the hearts of men,
'And echo thro' the world."

G Abd

Abd. Behold the KING,

And young ALBERTO marching by his fide,
As if he trode on air.

Vel. See, ORMISINDA
With folded hands implores her lift'ning fire.

En1ter the KING, ORMISI;'DA, TERESA, ALBERTO,

COSrTOLLO, 6'C.
King. The peers of Spain have judg'd. Stand forth,

ALBERTO !
Behold the champion of my daughter's fame.

Alb. Before the trumpet's voice unfheaths the sword,

Which one of us shall never sheath again,
Permit me, Prince of Persia, to entreat
A moment's audience. Not from fear I speak.
The cause I fight for, and the mind I bear,
Exalt me far above the thoughts of danger;
But from a conscious sense of what is due
To thee, renown'd ABDALLAH. In the heat
Of our contention, if my tongue has utter'd,
One word offensive to thy noble car,
Which might have been omitted, and the tone
Of firm defiance equally preferv'd;
For that I aik forgiveneis.

Abd. Less I mark'd

The manner than the matter of thy speech:
If thou dost need forgiveness, freely take it.

King. 'Twas generously alk'd, and nobly granted:

" Such courtesy with valour ever dwells."
Let me too crave for a few words thine ear.
Throughout the trying bus'nefs of this day,
Thou art my witnels, that my mind upright
Has never been by pol'rful nature bent,

" Nor

'1 Nor fway'd to favour and opinioh form'd,
" By long habitual and accuftom'd love;"
But I with equal hand the balance held
Between thee and my child.

Abd. Thou haft indeed.
It is but justice that I should declare it.

King. Then to thy candour let me now appeal,

And beg of thee to grant me one requeil,
Which I do not, but might, perhaps, command.

Abd. What is it ?

King. I have fearch'd my hapless child,

" Ev'n to the pith and marrow of her foul,"
Have touch'd her to the quick. She never shrinks
Nor wavers in the least. Perhaps, my Lord !
" Some fool officious, or some wretch that's worse,
" (If there is ought comes between man and wife
" That's more pernicious than a meddling fool)"
Some false designing friend has wrong'd her fame,
And pour'd his poison in ALoNzo's ear.
If thou wilt give some scope to her defence,
And bring the charge from darkness into light,
Then she lhall forthwith answer on the spot
Where now ]he flands before us.

Orm. If I fail

To clear my fame ev'n in ABDALLAH'S fight;
If but one dark suspicious speck remains
To make mine honour dim, let me be held
Guilty of ail. Before-hand I renounce
The right of combat, and submit to die.

Abd. Thy wilh is fatal, but it shall be granted,
This instant too. '

Orm. Blessings upon thy head !

G 2
- Ten

Ten thousand blessings! 0 ! thou dost not know
How happy thou haft made me. On my breast
A mountain lay: Thy hand has heav'd it off,
And now I breathe again.

Abd. 0 woman! woman

A little way from hence my people wait;
With them remains a necessary witness.
Thither I go, and quickly will return
To ring thy knell. [Exit ABDALLAH.

Orm. The knell of all my woes [

My heart knocks at my fide, as if 'twould burit
Itself a passage outwards. Yet a while,
Poor fuff'ring heart, and thou {halt beat no more.
Shortly for what I am I (hall be known,
Then let my doom be fquar'd to my desert
"Without indulgence.

King. I can trust thee, now:

Thine eye secure beams innocence and honour.
Thou art my daughter still.

Alb. I fear, 0 KING!

Some pracice vile, some infamous imposture,.
Supported by false witness. Still I wilft
The fair decision of the honest sword.

Enter ABDALLAH in a Spantjh Dress as ALONZO.
King. God of my foul! What mockery is this ?
Unless my eyes deceive me, 'tis ALONzo.

Orm. My hulband! " Ah !" [Runs to embrace him,

he repulses her.]

lAon. Away, thy husband's shame,
Shame to thy sex, reproach of womankind !

Orm. 0 ! fhieldme, heav'n ' ABDALLAI1 was ALONZO.
Alon. To heav'n appeal not.

Or',,.

Orm. I appeal to:heav'n,
Justice on earth will come too late for me.

King. [To ALONZO.] Haft thou no other witness than

thyself?

Alon. I have no other, and none else require.
King. Unfeeling man, to trifle with our sorrows,

And like a pageant play a mimic scene:
This is thy hatred of Pelagio's house,
Thy passion to confound a rival race.
Would I were young again !

Alb. [To ALONZO.] Defend thyself.
I. can no longer hold me from thy breast.

" Pel. Sound, trumpet, found! and heav'n defend

" the right !"
Alon. His blood be on your heads.

[Drawing hisfword.
[ORMIZINDA throws bertelf between theirfwords.

Orm. Hold! Strike thro' me

You know not what you do, unhappy both !
This combat mull not, nor it fllall not be.
The fun in heav'n would backward turn his course,
And shrink from such a fpeftcle as this,
" More horrid than the banquet of Thyestes."
You have no quarrel. I'll remove the cause.
A Roman matron, to redeem her fame,
Before her husband's and her father's eyes
Plung'd in her breast the steel.

[Stabs het/elf, and fills.

King. O ! Defp'rate deed !
What fury urg'd thy hand ?

Orm. Condemn me not..

There ;.as no other way to fave-but that
Must not as yet be told. My husband ! hear:

G_ M

My dying voice ! my latest words believe,
Whose truth my blood hath seal'd: I'm innocent.
As I for mercy hope at that tribunal
Where I thall soon appear, I never wrong'd thee.
When that is.manifeft, remember me
As love like mine deferv'd, and to this youth,
Who is-

Alon. Who is this youth ! All-feeing. God

A secret horror comes upon my foul.
Who is this youth !

Orm. He is.thy son.

Alon. My son!
Orm. Whom thy forsaken wife in sorrow borei
And gave in secret to COSTOLLO'S care.

Alb. Art thou my mother ! Dost thou die for me.?
Orm. I die with pleasure to be jufi to thee.

0 ! if that power which did inspire my foul
To rush between your swords, would let me live,
To prove my innocence. ALONZO speak !
Whilst I have breath to answer.

lAon. Tho' difarm'd,

And foften'd, even if guilty to forgive thee,
Thy solemn call I instantly obey.
That night appointed for our last farewell,.
That fatal night for ever curft-thou know'it.
What happened then.

Orm. I know thou didit not come,
Forlorn thou lefted'ft me.

Alon. Thou waft not forlorn,
In the dark wood with thee there was a youth..

Orm. [After a pause.] O heav'n and earth! a youth

It was TERESA.
Alon. TERESA!

Ter

Ter. Yes, that memorable night,
My brother's sword and helmet plum'd I wore.

" Alon. Great God ! the snares of hell have caught

"my foul."'

"- Ter." The night before, the Princess, .as he went, -

Was fright'ned in the wood, and I affum'd
That.warlike form, to seem-

Alon. No matter why ?
I- saw thee then, and thought thee what thou feemd'ft

King. She's innocent; like gold try'd in the fire,
Her honour flines Would I had died for thee !

[TO ORM1ISINDA.
Orm. Why didfl thounever till this moment speak ?

[To ALONZO..

Alon. Because I'm born and deflin'd to perdition.

( Had I a.voice like Etna when it roars;
" For in my breast is pent as;hot a fire;.
"I'd speak in flames.'

Orm. My Lord !

Alon. Do not forgive me..

Do not oppress me with such tender looks:
I will not be forgiven.
[OR.MISINDA raf/ing herelf andJ retching out her. arms.

Orm. Come to-my arms,.

And let me sooth thine anguish. Had I been
What I to thee appear'd, thy rage was jift.
A Spaniard's temper, and a Prince's pride,.
A lover's paflion, and a huruand's honour,.
Prompted no less.

Alon. Hear, men and angels hear.
" Let me fall down and worship."

[Th rows himself into her arms.

Oh I lov'd thee! ;

I lov'd thee all the while, to madness lov'd.

Orm. My husband ! dear as ever to my heart!
In my last moments dear !

Alon. My heart is torn.

My head, my brain ! How blest I might have been !
'With such a wife, with such a son !

Orm. To him

Pay all the debt of love thou ow'ft to me:
" Embrace thy son before mine eyes are clos'd:
" Let me behold him in his father's arms.

" Alon. Thou brave defender of thy mother's fame. i
" Orm. He's gentle too ; his foul dissolves in grief..
" Alon. My fault'ring tongue dares scarcely call thee

" son.
" Canfi thou endure the touch of such a father?

" Alb. My burtling heart, amidst its grief, is proud;
"Of such a father. Let me clasp thy knees,

And help to reconcile thee to thyself. [?hey embrace.
Orm." This pleasing fight subdues the pains of death,"'
My son !

Alb. My mother, Oh!

Orm. My dearest husband-
Alon. What would'It thou fay? Alas! thine eye

grows dim;
Thy voice begins to fail.

Orm. Remember me

When I am dead; remember how I lov'd you.
And thou, ALONZO, live to guard thy son,
To fix the Spanish scepter in-

[Dies klooig at her son.
ALONZO remains silent, with hl eyes six!d ':pon ORMISINDA.

,'#/. 'y father
Under thy gather'd brows I fee dcirli:;

Have

Have pity on thy son, who liv'd so long
In total ignorance of what he was:
Who has already seen one parent die,
And for the fad survivor trembles now.
My mother's last request ?

Alon. I'm mindful of it,

And to her sacred memory will be just.
Hang not on me, my son ! go to the KING
And pay thy duty there.

[The KING embracer ALBERTO.
King. My child, my all!
I lov'd thee at first fight.

Alon. 'Tis well; 'tis well.

The good old KING hath still some comfort left.
Now is my time.

[Draws his sword.

Oft have I struck with thee,

But never struck a foe with better will
'Than now myself.

[Stabs himself and falls.

Vel. CoI. Alas!

(ALBERTO turning.) Alb. 'Twas this I sear'd.
Alon. " There was good cause to fear." I would

have liv'd

For thee, if I with honour could have liv'd.
My son ! thy fathers were renown'd in arms;
The valour of our warlike race is thine:
But guard against the impulse of their blood.
Take warning by my fate.

" King. Thou might'ft have liv'd
" Renown'd ALONZO even I forgave

And pitied thee.

" Alon. I am more just than thou-

" For

" For I did not forgive, nor would I live,
"Upon the alms of other men; their pity"-
Farewell, my son! 0! O ORISINDA, flay
'Till I o'ertake thee. [Diet.

(King to Albb) Dwell not on this fight,
Prince of Afluria ! leave the scene of sorrow.

F IS.

# EPILOGUE. Written by MR GARRICK. SPOKEN BY MRS BARRY.

E PILOG UE.

Written by MR GARRaCK.

SPOKEN Br MRS B.RRr.
CT7IO' lately dead, a Princes/, and of Spain,

I am no GhoJl, but FleJh and Blood again!

No time to change this Dress, it is expedient
Ipas for Britilh, and your most obedient.

Ilow happy, Ladies, for us all-that we,

Born in this isle, by Magna Charta free,
ire not, like Spanish Wives, kept under Lock and Key.J
The Spaniard now, is not like him of Tore,
iWho in his wh/ker'dface, his Titles bore!
Nor Joy, nor Vengeance made himfinile or grin,
Siv'd were hisfeatures, tho' the Devil within!
He, when once jealous, to waJh out the Stain,
S:alh'd home, Jfabb'd Madam, andflal'd out again.
7ihaiins to the tintes, this Dagger-drawing Paqion,
Thro' po/lii'd Europe, is quite out of FaJhion.
Signor th' Italian, quick of fght and hearing,
Once ever liq'ning, andfor ever leering,
To Cara Spofa, now politely kind,
lie, beJf of HuJbands, is both deaf and blind.
Plynheer the Dutchman, with hisfober Pace,
Whene'er he fnds his Rib has wanted Grace,
Ie fee/l no Branchesfprouiingfrom his Brain,
But Calculation makes of Lols and Gain;
.nd when to part with her, occasion's ripe,
AMynheer turns out mine Frow, andfmokes his Pire.

When

[ 72 ]

When a brtjk Frenchman's Wife is given to Pt:ancing,
It never spoils his Singing or his Dancing:
Madame, you falfe-de tout mon Ceur-Adieu;
Begar you Cocu me, I Cocu you.-
He, tonjours gai, dispels each jealous Vapour,
Takes Sntf, Jings Vive l' amour, and cuts a Caper.
.sfor John Bull-not he in upper Life,
But the plain Engliflman, who loves his Wife;
Vhen honelf John, I fay, has got his doubts,
Hefullen grows, cfratches his head, and pouts.
What is the Matter with you,, Love ? Cries he;
Are you not well, my Dearest ? Humph ! Cries he:
You're such a Brute !-But, Mr Bull, I've done:
And if I am a Brute-Who made me one?
You know my tendernefs-My heart's too full-
Andfo's'n head--- thank you, Mrs Bull.
0 you base man !-Zounds, Madam, there's no bearing,-
She falls a weeping, and he falls afwearing.
With Tears and Oaths, the Storm dome/fic ends,' 1
The Thunder dies away, the Rain descends, }
She fobs, he melts, and then they ktfs andfriends. j
Whatever :afe these modern Modes may bring,
A little Yealoufy is no bad thing:
To me, wbofpeak from nature unrefin'd,
Jealousy is the Bellows of the Mind.
Touch it but gently, and it warms desire, 1
If handled i oughly, you are all on Fire ! F
If it Nandsj ill, Ajefl7ion mufJ expire! j
This Truth, no true Philosopher can doubt,
Whate'er you do-let not the .Flame go out.

ALFRED.

A

TRAGEDY.
--Leiori creer e lmavu/. IORACE.

# PREFACE.

PREFAC E.

HE success of a Dramatic Piece on
the Stage, depends, fays Voltaire,

upon accidental circumitances, but the
day of publication decides its fate.

Persuaded of the truth of this remark,

the Author of the Tragedy of ALFRED
would have submitted his performance
to the final judgment of the Reader,
without preface or apology, if he had not
been advised, and indeed urged, to make
a reply to some hostile criticisms, which
appear to have been founded upon pre-
judice and opinion, rather than reason
and argument.

It has been alledged, that the charac-

ter of ALFRED, in the Tragedy, does not
agree with the character of ALFRED in
History: " That the Hero, the Legislator,
is degraded to a Lover, whol enters the
Danish camp, from a private, not a pub-
lic, motive, and adts the part of an im-
poftor."

B 3 In

[ iv ]

In Tragedy, if the subjet be Hifiori-

cal, arrAuthor is not permitted to intro-
duce events, contrary to the great efta-
blifhed facds of History; for instance, in
the Tragedy of ALFRED, the Hero mulf
not be killed, nor driven out of England
1iy the Danes; but, preserving those an-
tient foundations, as the piers of his
bridge, the Author may bend his arches,
and finifih the fabric, according to his
taste and fancy; for the Poet is at liberty,
and it is the essence of his art, to invent
such intermediate circumstances, and in-
cidents, as he thinks will produce the
mofi affecting situations. In this depart-
ment, the Poet's fancy is controuled by
nothing, but probability, and confifence
of charader; the barriers of Dramatic
Truth. Let us apply this principle to the
point in dilpute.

ALUREDI was a young1 man, when he

fought the battle of Ethendune. The
victory, which gave him pon)flion of the
kingdom, muff have been gained before
he begun to model the state. Is it im-
probable to suppose, that a young Hero
was in love? Is it inconfisent to repre-

sent

sent. the person, who was a Legislator,
when advanced in years, as a Lover in his
youth? Does it degrade the charater of
a Hero to suppose, that he was in love
with the Princess, whom he afterwards
married ? Is it not rather injurious to his
heroism to conclude, that he chose a con-
fort whom he did not love? If this rea-
soning is just, there will be no difficulty
in vindicating the fubiequent conduct of
the Hero. The dramatic and the real
ALFRED, are both involved in the charge
of imposture; both enter the Danifl camp
in disguise; the previous events, as nar-
rated in the Tragedy, are nearly the fame
with those mentioned in I-iiftory. ALFRED,
for almofi two years, had wandered.
through England, concealing himsef un-
der feigned names. and characters. He
lived in the midif of his enemies, by be..
ing supposed to be dead. Emerging from
this obscurity, he appears in the Tragedy,
and is informed of the alarming, ambigu-
ous situation of Etheli\vida; his usual
stratagems present themselves, one would
think, naturally to his mind, extremely
agitated, and prone, both by temper and
habit, to the most daring and romantic

B 3 enterprizes.

[ vi ]

enterprizes. He resolves to enter the
Danish camp, to learn the fate of Ethel-
fwida, and o1)ferve the lhrength andorder
of the enemy's army, -before he ventures
a decisive engagement.

The continued artifice is inevitable.

The conduc of tAFRED. in the camp of
Iinguar; the manner in which he de-
ceives the Dane, is extremely similar to
tihe conduc't of Orestes in the Eledra cf
Sop'locles, vxlnici no critic hlitherto has
blamed. Oreses enters the palace of
-Lgirthus, as the meflenger of his own
death, carrying an urn, which contains
(he fays) the ashes of Orestes, whose un-
Timely fate e il ofL circumnflantially re-
lates. The Grecian hero praaifes the de-
ceit kith an intention to kill the person3
v/llom he deceives. The Engsiilf hero
decei-ves Hingvar only to gain access to
.Ehelf--id:', willhout meaning to hurt the
person of i:is enemy. To praise Sopho-
cles, and blame the Author of ALFRED,
for the fame conduc^, seems a direcl con-
tradiion, -which can only be accounted
lobr in one wvay; an imaginary idea has
been iformed of the characder of ALFRED,

- [ i i ,

as an old, mortified, ascetic sage, of spirit
too sublime and xetherial to descend to
human passions or human actions. But
the real, as well as the dramatic ALFRED,
was a young hero, a bard, a winner of
battles, brave and magnanimous, but com-
pelled by the prefiure of those desperate
times, in-which he' lived, to pradtice a
tihoufnd art's, to exil2 by simulation and
dilimulation. Whoever' recollects and
weighs th efe circunmfances, will, it is pre-
·fumed, readily pardon the artifice of AL-
FRED, in the Tragedy, and acknowledge
that the feigned incidents of the piece are
altogether consistent with the true. If
not, the Author muff be contented to la-
bour under tie im.putation of an errone-
ous judgment, for he meant nothing less
than to degrade the charader of ALFRED;.
on the contrary, finding, in the records of
a remote and barbarous age, a hero of
great renow-n, but from the defect of his
hifforians, involved in clouds and. dark-
ness:

k,:li CClplt inteir nubila co'ndit,

he was tempted to seize his name, and
display his character in new situations, con-

necded

[ viii

necled with the old and well known events
of his life and fortune. The play is print.
ed as it was performed. An Alteration
has been made, in one scene, and sent
to the Theatre, which, if the Tragedy
should be resumed or revived, may per-
haps contribute to heighten its effeclt.

* Whether this Tragedy was afterwards brought

forward upon the London Theatre, the Editors of
the present Edition have not been able to ascertain.
They are pretty certain, however, that the single
Alteration, mentioned above, never appeared in print.
Indeed, it is more than probable, that the firit was
the only Edition this Play ever underwent, as it was
with the utmofl difficulty they could procure a copy
from which to print. This circumflance, alone,
might have justified the Editors in undertaking the
present Work. But, when to this is added, that, in
their humble opinion, all Mlr HoMIE's Tragedies are
so far above mediocrity, as to be little, if any thing,
inferior to his DOUGLAs, though they unquestionably
have not met with equal celebrity upon the Stage,
they cannot entertain a doubt, that the lovers of the
Drama will be gratified, in having an opportunity of
supplying themselves with the whole Plays of a Gen-
tleman, whose writings have done so much honour
to himself and to his country, printed in a compaa
and uniform manner.

# PROLOGUE.

PROLOGUE.

O furni/ h a new Prologue for each Pla',
To dress tbefelf-fanme diyj a different way,n

Exhants the poet's art. Atd every year
Palates grow nicer, rarities more dear..
The cabinet, who in the Green-room Jit,
7he/ fcret junto of the realm of wit,
In these hard 'times, refolv'd their jlck tofpare,.
And crib the Prologue from the bill offare..
ALFRED on Eng ll/h ground alone may ijand,.
The darling hero of his native land:
No, no, our Poet cty'd-this is no time,
Nor is it prudent now to save your rhime;
Fi;'d with my fubje& I have rafltly dar'd,
And you in Prologue should prote&t your bard :
When my adventurous muse, indulg'd before,
Now vent'ring further, needs indulgence more;
She dares to trace the workings of a mind,
The greatest and the best of human kind
Adjust its movements to dramatic plan,
And blend the god-like hero with the man.
The greater ALFRED'S fame, our bard riYks more;
Such weight the flytig courser never bore.
ALFRED! w wvhofe lfe fitclh ilrange events adorn,
That hi/forJ beholds romance withlcorn
l;im to present, here in his native land,
Wlerei ill his genius, and his laws command,
I. an attempt like his, who raf,/y tried,
The burning chariot of the fun to guide.

2st

# DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

[x]
[ X 3

ret this atlemptfrtm admiration rose,
Nor Jould he find in ALFRED'S kingdom, foes j
Hie, who by lemper led, not love offame,
Is thefond echo of your hero's name.

DRAMATIS PERSONE.

M E N.

-ALFRED, King of England, Mr. LEWIS.
EDWIN, Earl of Devonrhire, Mr. HULL.
EARL of SURREY. Mr. WIrrEFIELD.
HINGUAR, King of the Danes, Mr. AISIN.
ROLLO, a Danish Chief, Mr. L'ESTRAvNE.

Oflicers, Englifli and Danifi.

WOME N.
ETHELSWIDA, betrothed to Mrs. BA .

r s ~ ALFRED, jM

RONEX, Consort of HINGUAR, Mrs. JACKSOC.
EDnA, } Attendants on ETHELSWIDAl
ELISA,

# ALFRED.

ALFRED.

ACT L

SCENE, A 4Camp.

Earl ofDEVONSIIRE and OFFICER.
Tj HE name of SURREY and the shield he bore,

With ease deceiv'd the unfufpeting soldier:
I knew the port of ALFRED.

De-son. So he thought;

And, ere he laid his weary limbs to reft,
Gave me, in charge, to warn thee to be silent.

O. My Lord of Devonshire, on me depend.

Steel fliall not tear the secret from my breast
Aftonifh'd as I am, at such a secret;
Who can unfold the cause ? Why, at this hour,
When, big with England's fate, each moment rolls,
Does ALFRED hide himself in cloudsand darkness,
And spread uncertain rumours of his Rtate,
Confounding all belief ?

Devon. He spread them not.

From his uncertain fate those rumours rose.
E'er since that time, when the perfidious Dane
Attack'd the English, in the hour of peace,
On ALFRED'S wedding day.

Of.

f - It was beiiev'd

That ALFRED, in the general carnage, fell
At Cyppenham; that, in the swelling flood
Of wintry Avon, ETHELSWIDA perifh'd.

Devon. Such was the firif report.

0;. Fain would I hear

Th' eventful tale of much-enduring ALFRED,
And what is yet of ETHLSWVIDA known.

Devon. When faithless HINGUAR, with his heft, ad-

vanc'd,

The King, diftra&ed for his lovely bride,
Sent off a hundred knights, by SURREY led,
To guard the Princess to a place of safety:
Then, furious, fac'd the Dane ;-with odds oppreft,
Around their King, his faithful nobles fell.
ALFRED, by favour of the night, efcap'd,
And wander'd long, obscure, from place to place,
Thro' woods and forefis, like some beast of prey,
By cruel hunters chac'd. Much he endured ;
And much his people fuiffr'd. Englilh virtue,
Like England's oak, grew firmer from the storm.
Often the peasant his last morsel brought
To the dark wood or cave, where ALFRED lay;
If queftion'd by the Dane, deny'd the deed;
And died, undaunted, to preserve his Prince.

On; The flory thrills my blood; by heav'n and earth-
Where did he reft at last ?

Devon. He never refted;

Even when he had a place of refuge found;
WVhere the deep winding streams, Parret and Thone,
Their waters mix, a little island lies,
With alders overgrown. No name it had,
Tho' now the name of Atheliley it bears.

Marflies

Marlhes and pools, by inundation form'd,
Perplex the dire approach. There ALFRED six'd
His dreary habitation. Two brave knights
At first were all his train. Day after day
The numbers grew; and many a gallant knight,
Found out the wild asylum of his Lord.
From thence, with inroads fierce, they gall'd the Dane.
Dark as the spirits of the night they came,
And vanifl'd at the dawn. In that retreat,
The fun, thro' every sign, o'er ALFRED rolld.

Of. Did ETZIELSWIDA there rejoin her-Lord ?
Devon. Nor (he herself, nor any of her train,
Have e'er been heard of, since Ihe left her Lord.

Of: For certain, then, file lives. If the had perilh'd,
Her fate would have been known.

Devon. The Danes afcrib'd

To me the inroads made by daring ALFRED;
And both the Danish princes took the field.
HINGUAR, with fire and sword laid waste the land.
Hubba, his hofR, to Kenwith castle led;
And, with firong flege, begirt my antient towers.
Then ALFRED issued from his lonely ille,
Conceal'd, as now, beneath another name.

Q0. Did ALFRED fight in Kenwith's bloody field ?
Devon. He six'd the fortune of that doubtful day.

When Hubba with his life the REAFEN loft,
Th' inchanted standard, on whose magic wings
Conquest, till then, had flown. The battle won,
ALFRED, impatient, bent his rapid course
To Weftmoreland; where, as he fondly hop'd,
His ETHELSWIDA dwelt. He found her not;
And, late last night, in deep despair, return'd.

0js I fee the clouded tra&t, thro' which he pass'd

C Invisible.-

Invifible.-Now he has reach'd the point,
And will break forth in Splendour. We mhall fight
To-morrow or to-day.

Devon. Cn these ileep hills,

By nature and by art, impregnable,
Which far and wide command Wiltonia's vale,
In absence of the King, my camp I pitch'd.
Audnacius H-. INGUAR occupies the plain,
And braves us to defccnid.

Of. Proclaim the King,

The King of England, at his people's head,
Then roll their riling valour on the foe.

Devon. Thy zealbecomcs thee. He will chufe his time.

Mean while, the story of his death believ'd,
Lcffcns the weight and burden of the war
Prevents the junction of the Daniflh chiefs,
And makes our foes secure. Soldier, farewell !
The King cxpeEts me: In my tent he refts.

Of.. My bosom throbs to fee him rife in arms. [Exit.

ManI:e DEVO.NSUIRE.

Spirits in heav'n may there attain perfection;

But weakness in this world, is nature's stamp;
With which fne marls the sons of men her own.
Who can compare with this accomplifi'd Prince,
In valour or in virtue ? He excells
The Counsellor, the Sage, in civil wisdom.
The light of antient tilms shines in his foul
And the Bards liften to his voice divine:
l:ut vain his virtue, and his wisdom vain,
Against affeEion's power ; too much he lov'd,
And mourns too much his ETiELS-.vIDA loft.
lie comes with grief opprefs'd.

Enter

Enter ALFRED.

Health to the King !
Has balmy sleep defccnded on his cares

Ads. My sleep is haunted with my waking thoughts

The vifioll of the night is ETHELSWIDA.
Sometimes, a broken scene of other woes
My troubled fancy to her image joins,
And adds the monarch's to the lover's grief.
This very night, in dreams, I thought myself
Under the friendly roof, where once I lay,
Beset, on every fide, with Danilh spears;
When, to preserve my life, a noble youth,
The only offspring of a widow'd dame,
Unknown to me, my personage affum'd,
And stopp'd the hounds, that bay'd for ALFRED'S blood.

Devon. 0 gen'rous youth !

Als. Full in the gate he flood

And brandishing his fivord, aloud proclaim'd,
That England's King alive should ne'er be taken.,
Headlong the foes rufh'd on: Numbers he flew:
At last, unflirinking, in his place he fell;
And still the Danes believe that youth was ALFRPED.

Devon. No wonder that they flould !-

Als. This very night,

Pale in his wounds, the gallant form appear'd,
Whilst o'er the bleeding body of her son,
Majestic in her grief, his mother hung.

Enter a MESSENGER.
lIe. (to DEVONSHIRE.) A warrior from the Danill

camp, demands
Admittance to thy presence.

(C 2 A/s.

Als. Let him enter. [Exit MESSENGER.

(ALFRED w/alks aside.)

Enter a WARRIOR, with hi beaver down.
Devon. Stranger, unfold thy purpose.

(He taker of his helmet.)

SURREY, by heav'n,
In Danifi armour ! (ALFRED, turning, fees bhim.)

Als. Ha!

Sur. My royal malter !

A,4s: SuvREY ! that strange array, thy aspet fad
Denounce thy tidings.-ETHIELswID,-

Sur. Lives.

Als. She lives !-Why, like the messenger of death,

Dost thou before me tfand ? Some dreadful thing
Thou fmother'ft in that pause. I charge thee speak.
What has befall'n my love ?

Sur. Captivity-
Als. Is ETHELSWIDA captive !

Sur, Yes, my Lord,
l/s. To whom ?

Sur. To HINGUAR.

A/s. To my mortal foe !

Is she in HINCUA,'s power ? Is brutal IiINGUAR
The malter of her fate ?

Sur. Would that I durRf
Fhis painful truth deny.

,j/s. O wretched ALFRED !

Deftin'd to susser mifcry and liame,
That princes seldom feel ! All other ills,
Altho' in troops they came, I have endur'd.
Manhood and patience yield to this. 0, SURREY !
Had I been SURREY, and hadst thou been ALFRED,

I

I ne'er had brought such tidings to my friend !

Sur. Great is the grief, that renders thee unjust.

Hear me, 0 King! and, if thou blam'ft me then,
Ill-fated SURREY flall offend no more.

A/s. What has my paflion spoke ?.Thy pallid cheek,.

Thy'hollow eye, those inauspicious arms,
Are signals of distress !

Sur. The story hear,

Of ETIELSWVIDA'S fortune; how it chanc'd,
That SURREY lives to tell it.

Als. 0, My friend!

Forget my words. With destiny at odds,
And with myself, impatience glanc'd at thee,
The martyr of my cause.

Sur. That fatal night,

When, with my precious charge, I left my Lord,
Thro' many dangers happily we pass'd;
But when we reach'd fair Eden's distant vale,
We found no refuge there.

dAs. Too well I know,

The Scots had raz'd Pendragon's lofty tower;
Then, whither didft thou fly ?

Sur. There I difiifs'd

Most of my faithful knights. A few I kept,
Of chosen men the choice. Eastward we fteer'd,
Towards the wilds, beyond the source of Tine.
By midnight marches, in untrodden paths,
That wind o'er mountains valt, thro' valleys deep;
We reach'd a ldnely'rianfion, in a dale,
Which at the foot of fnow-clad Cheviot lies.
There ETHELSVIDA found a safe retreat;
And in those defarts wild, (he might have dwelt,
Unheard of and unknown.

C 3 '
.

l/s. Why did she not ?

Sur. The rumour of thy death a tempest rais'd,

Which, from that harbour, drove her out to sea.
On me fie laid her absolute commands,
To guide and guard her, as I could, to Kenwith:
lly friends I warn'd to meet us on our way,
And on we went, till one unhappy time,
The Danes furpriz'd us in a narrow vale.
Againit their fierce attack, our little band,
Around the Princess, form'd a fence of iteeI.
M.ore' and more narrow fiill the circle grew,
'ill I alone was left with ETHELSWIDA.
Alone I fought, till at her feet I fell.
Her dismal firieks, her piercing cries I heard;
More grievous far, than all the wounds I bore.

i; ._ Methinks I hear her cries: She call'd on AL-

Fr.ED;

Did fne not, SURREY ? Providence divine!
Why v1as rnot ALFRED near ?

Sur. As I have heard,.

From some who in the troops of HINGUAR fought,.
for he it was who led the hoflile- band,
She fnwoon'd with grief and-terror on the spot.
The Dane to her unwonted pity howv'd,_
And rais'd her from the ground. ' '

A f. Tell me the truth
l)o not deceive me, SUR.EY -

Sa'. 0, my Lord,

I never did, nor will I now deceive thee
Blut of the Princess this I only know,
That, in the Danish camp, she still remains,
Guarded with care, her name and rank unknown.

A/if. What should 1 think i Can te submit to live-

To

To live; her honour loft ? How didft thou 'scape
From such aDflaughter ? And how cam'ft thou hither,
Commiffion'd by the-Dane ?

Stur. When night came on,

Some Englifl peasants, -who had seen the fight,
Crept from their huts, in secret, to the field,
With pious purpose to inter the dead.
In me alone, some sparks of life they found.
Their care preferv'd me. When my strength return'd,
To HINGUAR'S camp I went, gave out myfclf
Of Danish race, altho'.in England born.
My service was accepted. I have found
Favour in HINGUAR's fight; and, in the band
That guards his person, serve. From them I- learn'd,
That ETHELSWIDA, near his tent, is lodg'd
A mournful captive.

A/s. Near his tent! 0 heav'n !
How have I merited ?

Devon. Raise not thine eyes,

Nor lift thy hands to heav'n : Far other looks,
Far other aacions, heav'n of thee requires.
Thou art a king, a soldier, and a lover;
Fight for thy crown, thy country, and thy bride.
Go forth, this instant, animate thy troops,
And lead them to revenge their vrongs and thine.

(ALFRED flzt.er.)

Why does my royal mailer hang his head,
And bend on earth.his eyes ?

1/f Forbear, my Lord.
(70 SURREY.) What is thine errand to the camp of

England ?

Sur. To offer battle.-nut the true intent.
Of IISNGUAR, is to learn if ALFRED lives, ;;,

For

For various rumours have perplex'd the Dane.

Als. He fliall be satisfied. I fee a ray,

Which thro' the darknefsbreaks. It grows more bright.
My friend, the tumult of my thoughts forgive.
SURREY ! (Goes afnde with SURREY.)

Manet DEVONSHIRE.

What does he meditate ? I know

His mind with dreadful images is fill'd.
In HINGUAR's arms he fees his ravifh'd bride:
Ravifh'd or not, she's captive to his foe.
Enflav'd by force, 'tis force must set her free.
He cannot treat with HINGUAR ; that he knbos,
By fad experience ; for the woes of ALFRED,
And all the evils of this hapless land,
Arose from England's confidence in Denmark.
No ties, divine or human, bind the Danes.
Of all the impious race, by far the worst,.
And moll profane is HINGUAR.

Als. (to SURREY.) Go, prepare-
For my reception.

Sur. Ah, may heav'n avert
Those ills, which my prophetic foulforebodes!

[Exit SURREY.

Devon. I heard the parting words of faithful SURREY,
Which mark too wvell, the colour of thy purpose.

l/s. Thy approbation I did not expet.

None can approve, but those who feel like me.
The Danish camp, difguis'd, I wvill explore,
Clad in the vesture of a British Bard,
And learn, for certain, ETHELswIDA'S fate,
Whatever has befall'n my hapless bride;
Affur'd of that, my heart ihall flake no more.

Devon.

Devon. Something like this my anxious foul foretold.
Als. I read thy thoughts, but urge me not to hear

Thy friendly counsels, which I cannot follow.
In great events, the agitated mind
Consults its genius only. Low or high,
The acive spirits in that level flow,
Nor fall nor rife, to at another's counsel;
That potent counsellor direcs me now;
I feel the impulse, oft in perils felt:
Nor is my arm confinld to ETHELSWIDA;
The strength and order of the Danifl hoff,
How, and what quarter, I may best attack,
Attentive I'll obfcrve.

Devon. Since thou haft six'd

Thy resolution, to contend is vain;
The part of friendship now is to consult,
How we may guard thee best.

Als. By the moon's light,

As, with a swift career, their camp I pass'd,
A wood, extended on the right I saw,
(Their left the village Ethendunc defends,)
CanfR thou inform, if they have open'd paths,
Or planted watches there ?

Devon. Neither, my Lord !
Presumptuous HINGUAR holds such caution vain.

A/s. When dusky eve descends, in the dark time,

Between the fall of night and the moon's rife,
In silence, thither march a thousand men,
Chosen with care, the bravell of our host
There let them watch till morn; if no alarm
Comes ere the dawn, at dawn they may retire.

Devon. To chute andlead.that band flall be my'care:
AMv warriors are thc Hunters of the Hill

Accuftom'd

# ACT II.

AccuRtom'd to the woods, fearlcfs they move,
By the pale glimpses of the clouded moon !
To. them the changeful aspects of the night,
Whose false presentments armies oft confound,
In all their forms are known.

A/ls. I would not wifil
A better leader, nor a braver band.

Devon. The word.

/Als St. George.
Devon. 0, may he guard the King:

And, as the minds of yonder heath'n host
In darkness lie; so may their eyes be dark
And blind to ALFRED !

Als. As they still have been.

This is no new, tho' seeming bold attempt.
I have eflay'd it, for a flighter cause,
When, in the Isle of Athelney, I lay,
The quarters of the Dane I oft cxplor'd,
In this disguise, and mark'd deftrution's line.
Farewell, thy wisdom no direEtion needs
Nor fiall I long be absent from my friend. [Exeunt..

End of the FIRST ACT.

A CT II.
SCE NE, The Danzif Camp.

Enter SURREY.
Sur. T HE. tale of Orpheus, (which in Rome I

A hecald,)

Whose

Whose lyre harmonious civiliz'd mankind,
Is verified to-day. The stubborn sons
Of Denmark sympathize with ALFRED'S itrain:
And, as he leads the song, their passions flow.
IIscGUA.. himself is wonder-liruck.

Enter an OFFICER.

Of. Begone;
Thou tread'ft already on forbidden ground.

Sur. Inform the King, that ERICK is return'd,
Of. HINGUAR approaches, and with him the Bard,

WThofe lyre is fram'd, by necromantic art
Inchanted are the firings.-Away, with speed.

[Exit SURREY.

Entir Z IINGUAR and ALFRED, inl conveIfation.
ling. (to the OFFICER.) Withdraw. [Exit OFFICER.

Now, I believe the death of ALFRED.

This ring, the well-known signet of his power,
l-e never trusted to another hand.

Al/s. When, in the rocky cave, I found him dead,

I then rcfolv'd, King of the warlike Danes,
To bear to thee the tidings of his death
And as a proof, which could not be deny'd,
That ring I took, which erfl mine eyes beheld,
Upon his finger plac'd, with rites and charms,
When he was crown'd, in London, England's King.

IThrg. I will reward thee to thy utmost wifnl.

Thou art no Saxon, but of Britifl race; , -
And lov't the mountains of thy native land;
Chute where they fairefR rife ; they flall be thine,
With all their valleys and their Sylvan fireams.
The Gods I serve have sent thee to my aid.

'Ti

'Tis my belief thou can'st aflift me much,
In what is dear'er to my foul than empire.

Al/s How can the bard afifti a Prince like thee ?
ling. In high refpe&, I hold thy art divine.

Whate'er thou art, magician, bard, or seer,
Or if thou art all these, I crave thine aid.
Amidst my viAories, I am moss wretched
By love tormented, unsuccessful love.

A/s. Thy love, with equal love, is not return'd ?
IIing. More grievous frill. The fair, my foul desires,

Cannot diftinguill nor reward n;y love.
If thou her cruel malady can'st charm,
And drive wild frenzy from her troubled mind,
Talk, to fulfill thy wifl, the power of HINGUAR.

A/s. In me behold the man of thy desire.

Unlawful arts I neither use, nor know;
But am, in nature's secrets, deeply fkill'd.
Far from the pleasures and the cares of men,
By strange misfortune, to the defart driv'n,
A lonely anchoret, for years, I liv'd.
To me are known the virtues of each plant,
That grows in hill or dale, in fun or fliade;-
How one, by sympathy, with madness taints
And how another clears th' inseted blood.
Much I can help or harm.

H;ig. Exert thy kill

And plant and herb, or song and spell employ.
Do what thou wilt'ft, so thou reftor'ft the fair.

A/s. Did her dire frenzy from diltrefs arise ?

From sudden perturbation of the mind ?
Or is the cause unknown ?

iHing. From grief, from fear,
From terror to excess, her frenzy rose.

Dreadful

Dreadful the shock ihe fuffer'd !

A/s. How, my Lord?
What' did Ihe susser ?

Fling. In her person, nothing,

But agony of mind, to an excess,
Not easy to describe.

Als. Has lile reveal'd
Her name, her family ?

Hing. By different names

She calls herself; and when with quefRions urg'd,
She makes extravagant, fantastic anfiers,
And seems unconscious of her true condition.

A/s. Her general'temper is it fad or gay ?
For frenzy is molt various.

Hing. So is her's;

For flie exhibits every various mood,
That frenzy e'er affum'd. But thou flalt fee,
And judge her fitrange demeanour. In yon tent,
With purple bright, the dwells; and to this spot,
Where now we iland, she frequently repairs.
This is her usual hour. Behold ! lhe comes.

Enter ETHELSIVDA, with tWio Women attending,

fantalically/ dre.

Als. How beautiful file is ! 0, piteous fight!
Her frenzy's high.

Hing. Did e'er thine aged eyes

Behold her equal ? I
(ETHELSVIDA palses them, anid advances to the front.)

Elh. Eagles of the rock,

Lend me your founding wings; cherubs of heav'n,
Who soar above the fun, your pinions lend,
To bear me to my love.

D Hing.

Hing. (to ALFRED.) Observe !
A/s. I do.

Eth. The crefled swans were heard to sing

A fad lamenting lrain;
As floating with the liream, his corse

Descended to the main.

I-iing. Still of a lover loft. I never heard
Her roving words tend to one point so long.

-/if. Sorrow and rage excessive, both arc madness.

Time always cures them, if the frame is found,-
She Ipeaks again.

Eth. My heart swells in my. breast,

And flops my breath. Oceans of tears I shed,
And falke the high pavilion with my sighs.
But neither sighs nor tears give me relief.
(To HINGUAR.) Thou keeper of the keys of death and

hell,

'Unlock the iron gate, and set me free,
Then I shall smile and thank thee.

Hi'nL. Queen of beauty !

I am thy captive, and obey thy will.
To soothe the grief that preys upon thy heart,
My care has hither brought a Bard divine,
Whose voice can charm the ache and agony,
Which spirits feel. He's gentle, mild and wife,
And shall attend thy call.

Eth. I will not call him.
His garb is vile ; I hate it.

Als. IHate not him,

Whose heart is tun'd to sympathize with thine.
I thun the house of mirth, and love to dwell
A constant inmate of the house of sorrow.
(Whi/fi he speaks, ETIIELSWIDA gazes and knows hi:.)

- Eth.

Eth. Then thou art not so wife, as wou'd appear,
From thy white head, and grave habiliments.

(Walks aJide in great emotion. Relurtns.)

If thou art fond and weak, and foolifli too
Why, so am I. We may consort together,
And build strong catles.

Js. Yes.

Eth. Thy harp ihall move

The trees'and rocks. -In order they lhall rife,
As high as Babel's tower.

ls. Forthwith they fliall.

Eth. Are all thy songs of melancholy frain ?
Als. The greater part.

Eth. Then thou haft loft thy love ;

Else thou could'f ne'er have felt true melancholy.
I will not hear thee now. I'm poor in spirit,
And have not force to bear a strong affeAion.
I chufe a garland song, a lighter strain.

There lv'd a youth, byfilver ihaimes,

Who lov'd the maidens fair;
But loose, at large, the rover rang'd,

Nor felt a lover s care.

We must not with'one censure level all.
Som e men are true of heart, but very few.
Those live not long; they die before their time.
'Tis pity of them. Oh ! (W Valk aftle.)

Hing. A fhow'r of tears,
Fast falling, calms the tempest of her mind.

l/s. 'Tis a deep rooted malady.

Enter a DANISH OFFICER.

Of. My Lord,
D 2 A.

A troop of Englifl horsemen, from the hill,
Descend into the plain. Our warriors wait,
Impatient, thy commands.

Hing. I come. [Exit OFrcmnt.

(To ALFRED.) Remain
Till I Return. EDDA, ELISA, mark me.
Give her full feope; in nothing cross her mood,
That this reflecting sage, complete, may fee
The piture of her mind. [Exit.

Eth. (dftetr a pagfe, approaches ALFRED.) Thou pil-

grim fad,

Whose head the hand of time hath filver'd o'er,
Com'it thou from Palestine ?

Als. From Rome I come.
Eth. From Rome! Thou doll not wear thy triple

crown;

And yet I know thou art the holy Sire,
The common father of the Chrillian world.
Companion show to me.-With wicked men,
With heathens and idolaters, I dwell;
Without the benefit of holy church.
Nor ihrift, nor absolution have I known,
For seven long years.

/As. I will, myself, confess thee.

The peace of heav'n flall on thy foul descend.
(To the attendants.) A course most fortunate her fan-

cy leers;

Moit likely to effea the King's desire.
In this conceit, to me flie may reveal
Her name, her parentage, perhaps the grief
That rankles in her breal. Please to retire,
As if it ;ere confeflion.

Elt.

El. Haste away,
For fickle is her mind.

Edda. (going.) I like it not.

This may be stratagem: They're Saxons all.
'Tis fit they be obferv'd. I'll keep in fight. [ExeuntV'

Manent ALFRED and ETHELSWIDA.
Eth. ALFRED !

Als. ETHELSWIDA! (Ofers to embrace her.)

EtL. 0, beware !

Death lurks in every corner. Why expose
Thy noble life to such inglorious peril?
Not thus did I expet to fee the King.
If e'er mine eyes beheld my Lord again,
I hop'd to fee him in the light of steel,
Prompt to defend himself, or rescue me.
WThy com'R thou thus?

A/ls I come to know thy fate.

For, since I heard thou waft in HINGUAR'S power,
Diftradion here has reign'd.

Eth; I comprehend thee.
Could ALFRED think I wou'd survive my honour ?

%/f. I knew not what to think: But much I sear'd.
Eth. Dilmifs that fear; and be of this affur'd,

I shall be as I am, or (hall be nothing,
Fly from this placo of peril; fly, with speed.
Thy presence to us both is lure perdition.
My own diltrefs, with fortitude, I-bore:
But feel my weakness, when the danger's thine,
The part I a&, I hardly can fusain.
Did'lt thou not mark, when firlt I heard thy voice,
How real passion mingled with the feign'd ?
When I beheld thee risen from the grave,

D 3 And

And braving death again for ETHELSWIDA, .
The veil of frenzy fcarcc conceal'd my transport.

A/s. I saw thy ilruggling foul, then-not till then;,
Athwart the cloud, the beam of reason shone.

Eth. Tarry riot here; else I fliall lole my reason,
And be the thing I seem.

As. Till night fiall spread

Her favouring mantle oer my.fecret fleps,
I cannot leave this place and then I hope
To bear thee with me, thro' the holt of Denmark.
Of that, we fliall have time to speak hereafter.
This garb secures me frequent, free access.
Now, let me warn thee, (hould it be fufpeted,
That I am not the person I pretend,
''hy ready answer muf, with mine, accord;
I am thy brother; SURREY is my name,
And EMMA thine.

Eth. Alas ! Ill-omen'd name !
In my defence, the noble SURREF. fell.

Al/s. He lives to serve thee in the camp of HINGUAR,
Eth. What miracle ! mine eyes beheld him slain.
,ls. They come, they come ; resume thy wild de-
meanour. (ETIELSWIDA wlalks aside, asformertl,.)

Enter ELISA and EDDA.
Eli. The King draws near.

Elh. Array me for his presence.

I'll have a crown to deck my pensive brows;
It fliall be made of sun-beams, and of liars,
Caught as they ihoot: and when the rainbow refts
Its glowing (fast upon the mountains fide,
1'l dip my robe in gold. Away, away.

[Exeunt ELISA and EDDA.

Enlte

Enlterl I'IHNGAR.

Hing, It wSas a false alarm. The Elglifh horse,

When we advanc'd against them, whecl'd and fled.
What judgment haft thou form'd ? Did Ihe fay ought
In her confeflion ?

,/f. She flew off at once

From that conceit. Her mind's a burning fire,
Where sudden thoughts, likc wreath's of fmicke arise,
And, parting from the flame, disperse in air.
IHer fhatter'd fancy, like a mirror broken,
RefleAs no single image jull and true,
But many false ones.

Hing. Do'll thou hope to cure
The malady, which thou defcrib'it so well ?

Als There is more ground of hope than cause of fear.
- Hing. Forthwith the wonders of thine art eflty;
Meanwhile, within the circle of my tents,
Secure remain. Gothred's imperious daughter,
(Whom in an evil hour, when new in England,
''o please the Danes I was induc'd to wed,)
Is in the camp arriv'd. I guess her purpose,
And will prevent her speed.

(A voice behind thiefcenes.)

Prefumptaous 'slave!

('Another voice.)
Thou can'st not pass.

Who shall oppose the Queen ?

Enlter RONEX.

Ron. I'come too late; flie's gone. Hail to the King;

Who is this minion, that usurps my place,
And, with mock majelty, dilhonours Denmark

Hing. Outrageous as thou art, refpe&t at least

Thel

The firanger's ear.
(To ALFRED) Retire, and shun the form. [Exit ALS,

Ron. What pageantry is this ?

Hiiig. Why haft thou left,

Without permission of thy Lord, the place
Appointed for thee ?

Ron. Ha ! Am I thy slave ?

That thou prcfum'ft to treat me with such scorn.
Haft thou forgot my birth ? do'st thou not know
I am the heir of Denmark and of England-
That in my right thou reign's ?

Hing. To Denmark go -

There o'er thy barren rocks and defarts reign:
But fair and fertile England is my own.
The sword, that won, shall keep the pleasant land.
I conquer'd for myself.

Ron. Talk's thou of conqueftr

Thou woman's warrior, who confum'ft thy days
In secret, lawless, and inglorious love
Whilst o'er thy head thy flaughter'd brother's ghost
For vengeance fkrieks in vain.

Hing. None of my foes,

Of whom the felleft far, I reckon thee,
Shall long tAude my vengeance: From this hour
I cast thee off; for ever I renounce thee ;
And soon thou lhalt behold another Queen
Exalted in thy place.

Ron. Fulfill thy threat,

And thou ihalt soon behold another King.
The leaders and the soldiers of thy host
Revere in me the Scandinavian line.
When I am not thy Queen, thou reign'ft no more.

Iling. This instant leave me, or by Denmark's Godsi

By

# ACT III.

By Loda's altar, ftain'd with human blood,
To Iceland's dreary ifie thou shalt be borne,
There to repent thy folly.-Guards!

Enter an Officer with Soldiers.

Ron. Stand off,
Tyrant, when next we meet.-

Hing. Force her away.
Never let Gothred's daughter enter here.

[Exeunt RoNEX and Guards,

Small is her boalted influence with my people;
And yet her jealous rage is fell and bloody;
My fair Norwegian felt her mortal hate.
I muff not truit my lovely captive's life,
To the flight keeping of that officer,
Who yielded to the threats of haughty RONEX.
This inflant I'll dismiss him, and appoint
The brave and faithful ERICK to his place. [Exit.

End of the SECOND ACT.

,-

A CT III.
SCENE, &c. as lefore..

HINGUAR and EDDA.
dda. ~ ARLY my doubts arose. I ne'er believ'd

.

Her malady was real. Often, my Lord,

Have I obfcrv'd her looks sedate and calm
.Then, quick as thought, when- lie had caught my.eye,

She

She started into well dissembled frenzy.

Hing. Why ne'er unfold thy doubts ?

Edlda. Till now, I durst not;

Because I had no proof of my suspicion:
For in thy pretence, with amazing art,
She counterfeits diltraaion. Well I knew
Thy partial love would ill receive a charge
On mere conjecture founded. What I saw
This day to certainty has chang'd my doubts.
Try her, my Lord ; and if I have deceived thee,
I alk no mercy.-

Hing. If she has deceiv'd me,

As I believe she has, I'll ihow her none.
This is the Lover whom her songs bewail,
The favourite, for whom flhe guards her charms,
And mocks the credulous Dane. He mocks me took
I'll take luxurious vengeance.-Guards.

Enter ERICK with a plume and casr, with Dani/h

Soldiers.

Erick. My Lord.

Hing. Unfheath your swords. Be ready, at a word,
To execute my orders. Send him hither (To ERICK.)

[Exit. EDDA.

Surpriz'd, fubdu'd, with dread of instant death,
I'll search his secret fouli and then the slave,
For his presumption, dies.

Enter ALFRED, vieLws tlhe Sene for a inoment,

and then advances intrepidly..

, Hing. Thou traitor ! villain !

Hlow durst thou, with thy puny arts, attempt
To practise upon me ?

Alif.

A/s. Take back those names;

Which utter'd here, do not difionour me;
But on thyself return.

Hing. Ha! Do'st thou brave me ?
I'll pull thy courage down.

A/s. Thou can's not, HINGUAR.
I mock the lifted sword, and finile at death.

Hi;ng. Tell me, impoltor, who thou really art,

And who that woman is, thy false associate
In this vile artifice ?

A/s. Not from the dread

Of what thy vengeance can inflit, I answer;
But to assert my honour. To thy tents,
Altho' difguis'd I came, no traitor I.
I came not, HINGUAR, to attempt thy life
But to enquire a much.lov'd sifter's fate;
For whom I trembled, since the hour I heard
She was thy captive.

Hing. Ha ! thy sifter, fay'ft thou?
What is thy name ?

A/s. SURREY.

Hing. Thy name is known,

Of great account, amongil the foes of Denmark.
Thou art the chosen friend of Englifll ALFRED.

4As. His faithful subjec.

Hing. What's thy filler's name

A/s. EMMA. Alas ! to great misfortune born !
Hing. Suspend a while thy judgment of her fortune.
Retire. (To the Guards, who go of.)

The tale of ALFRED was devis'd
To smooth thy way to Ei3MMA.

A/s So it was,
Yet ALFRED, if alive, in peril lives

And

And doubtful, at this moment, is his fate.

Iing. Dead or alive, I care not. If he lives,

He never can regain his kingdom l6t ;
Nor England e'er shake off the yoke of Denmark.
SURREY, tho' war and battle are my joy;
Yet I desire sometimes in peace to dwell.
Thy sifter's beauty has inflam'd my heart,
And policy accords withjlove's desire.
The charming EIMiA flall be HINGUAR'S bride;
And England, partial to her own, obey
Princes, whose blood is native to the land.

Als. Thou haft a Queen.

Hiln. What then ? The Gods of Denmark

Do not, like yours, their votaries confine
To the domefic bondage of one wife.
My foul abhors tile daughter of old Gothred,
That furious woman, who was once my Queen:
Her I divorce ; and on her vacant throne,
Will place thy sifter.

ilf. That her faith forbids.
A Christian cannot wed a heathen Lord.

linig. Thy mind, averse, is fertile in objecions.

Saxon, thou fpeak'lt not with a brother's tongue.
Thou haft deceiv'd me once.- ERaII !

Enter ERICK.

Erick. My Lord.
Hing. Within my tent confine and guard him ftriclly.

[Exeunt ALFRED and ERICK.

I do furpeEt this is the lover frill,
It much behoves me soon to be refolv'd.
'Tis just, with fallacy, to prove the falfc;
And turn the arts of woman on herself.

I'll

I'll give a rude alarm, and shake her foul,
Even to the center. To my with, flie comes,
Buried in thought. She has not yet obferv'd me.

(Stebs aside.)

Enter ETHELSWIDA.

Eth. I fear we are difcover'd and bctray'd.

That Daniil woman, whom I never lov'd,
Has held a private conference with HINGUAR;
She pierces me with her malicious eyes,
Swimming in joy, and conscious of detecion.
She has oerheard us.-

(HINGUAR comes behind andSeizes her arm.)

Ah !

Hing. Why dolt thou ltart,

And look so guilty ? Where's thy frenzy now ?
The artful semblance that deceiv'd the Dane ?
Thy fear betrays the fraud I knew before.
Confess thy fault and trull to HINGUAR'S mercy.

Eth. Mercy!

Hing. Altho' thou haft offended deeply,

Thy beauty pleads for thee: My love forgives.
One vi&im is enough.

Eth. One vicim ! ah !

Hing. Yes, thy associate, the pretended Bard,

Who call'd himself thy brother: He hath paid
The forfeit, with his life.

Eth. (Staggers ready to faint.) Thou bloodyDane !

Inhuman monster ! haft thou murder'd ALFRED ?
And dost thou speak of love to ETHELSWIDA ?

Hing. ALFRED and ETHELSWIDA

Eth. Tyrant! Yes.
There's nothing now to save or to deny.

E In

In me, behold the bride of royal ALFRED !
Thy treachery, and not thy valour, Dane,
Upon our nuptial day, divorc'd our loves. '
But neither force nor fraud can part us now.
Where ALFRED is, my foul shall ihortly be.

sing. Thou'rt greatly chang'd. This courage is not

real.
'Tis not thy nature.

Eth. I flall change no more.

My former fear from love extreme arose.
Then, life was dear to me, for ALFRED'S fake.
But now, since he is dead, for ALFRED'S fake
I wish to die, and loath the life I lov'd.

Ring. 'Tis bravely spoken.

Eth. 'Tis not my desire

To hold discourse with thee. Go, from my fight;
Thou'rt hideous to my eyes, thou vile assassin !

(7iurns away,.)
Hing. Hear me !

Eth. I wou'd not, if I could prevent it.

But what I can I will. I speak no more.
My lips are clos'd for ever.

Hing. Yet I know

A way to open them. That bitter smile
I reck not; no, nor those averted eyes.
Know, I have turn'd thy arts against thyself,
And caught thee, in thy own deceitful snare.
From impotence of mind,, thou haft reveal'd
Th' important secret, that the Bard was ALFRED.
Now, if he dies, it is thy folly kills him:
He lives, by thee difcover'd to his foe.

Eth. Does ALFRED live, and has my tongue betray'd

him '

Have

Have I difcover'd ALFRED to his foe ?
Barbarian

Hiz;n. Still thou may'it prefcrve his life,
His fate on thee depends.

Eth. On me!

Hing. On thee !

Accept my offer'd hand, and ALFRED lives.
Nay, re-a'cends, in peace, his father's throne.
If not, I swear by Odin, awful name,
The God of battles whom alone I serve,
This hour my rival dies.

Etb. Is this thy mercy

Would HINGUAR, conscious that my heart is full
Of love to ALFRED, take a faithless hand ?

Hting. i wou'd ; I will this instant speak the word.
Eth. I flhudder at the thought, and loath thee more,

Much more than ever. Brutal is thy paflion,
And horrible to womankind thy love.

Hang. Is thii thy anfi'er ? Whilst the Saxon lives

Thou haft some hope. Of him I will dispose,
Without delay. (Going.)

Eth. Stay, I conjure thee, flay.

Hing. My time is precious. I have deeply sworn,
And six'd the only ransom of his life.

Eth. Touch not the life of ALFRED.

Ii;ng. Every word

Thy paflion speaks accelerates his doom.
I go to fee him die.

Eth. (Jeizing his robe.) Thou flialt not go.
By all that's holy, I will not farvive him.

Hin;g. Some of thy sex, I know, have sworn as much,
And have furviv'd the vow. (Going.)

Eth. One moment Rtay.

E 2 Hing..

Ining. Her countenance is like a troubled iky,
When the wind veers about.

Elh. (nJfde.) Inspire me, heav'n!

The life of ALFRED, and the fate of England,
Are in the balance. Yes, I am infpir'd.
Heav'n, that suggests the thought, will give me strength
To aft the generous deed.

Iling. Her mind gives way.

Eth. HINGUAR ! should I content to be thy bride,

Would ALFRED'S life be safe ? What pledge for that ?
What holtage haft thou worth the King of England ?

iing. Confider and demand.

Eth. Set ALFRED free:

The English camp is near: conduct him thither:
Let me have full assurance of his safety;
Then lead me to the altar. When my vow
Is made, tho' made to thee, our holy faith
Enjoins, till death, observance. [Exit.

Manet HINGUAR.

Set him free,

And trust a woman's word ! I like it not.
Fortune hath favour'd me beyond my hopes.
My rival, both in empire and in love,
Is in my power. How fihall I belt improve
The prosperous hour, which my good planet rules ?

Enter Er.ICK.

Erick. My Lord, the valiant ROLLO craves admittance.
Hin;g. 1 will not fee him. He is sent by RONEX,
With some ungrateful meflage. Alk his business.

Erick. Unafk'd he told it. In the field, to-day,
His brother prefs'd too near the Englifli horse;

They

They turn'd and took him pris'ner. ROLLO begs
That he may be exchang'd.

Hing. For whom ?

Eric'. For SURREY,.
Whom in the tent he saw.

Hing. He and his brother,

And all their tribe, are not worth such a ransom.
ERICK, that SURREY is the King of England.-
ALFRED himself.

Erick. ALFRED !

sIing. He is, by heav'n !

And my fair captive is the Mfercian maid,
By ALFRED lov'd, the beauteous ETHELSWIDA !
Go, bring the Saxon hither. [Exit ERICK.

Manet HINGUAR.

Now, I'll found him.

The policy of Rtate enjoins his death:
The politics of love suspend his doom.
The instrument he is, by which I'll work
This woman to my will. If I can make
Her lover false to her, pride and revenge
Will bring her not reluctant to my arms.
Thus play the passions of her wayward sex.
Birds of a kind, they build their nests alike;
And one true falcon, like another flies.
So, every woman, when her love is fcorn'd,
By certain inflint, takes the fame revenge..

Enter ALFRED, in hs fjirl dreS ; advances resolutely.
Twice have we met to-day, and both the times,
With borrow'd names and forms, thou haft deceiv'd me.
ALFRED ; I know thee now.

E3 Als.

Als. HINGUAR, thou dost.

Hing. Repine not at this chance. If we had met

In lifts of combat or embattled field,
Death or captivity had been thy portion.

./ls: Uncertain ever is the fate of arms.
Hilig. I have not found it so. In every battle

On my viaorious banners fortune waits.
Suppose, then, that thou wert, by chance of war,
My pris'ner; fay, what wou'dft thou now expe&
Should be thy doom ?

./f. 'Tis HINGUAR'S part to fay,
And mine to fulfer.

Hing. Thou shalt susser nothing

Unworthy of a king. Tho' of the race
Of war and battle, who have firetch'd the spear
Of conquest o'er mankind ; yet I will speak
The words of peace. The English and the Danes
Have fought too long for this contefled land,
Whose spacious kingdoms can, with ease, contain
The riVa! nations ; and the fertile fields
Glut, with luxurious plenty, their desires.
Let us divide the land, and join in league
Eternal: Then, united, ihake the world.

/ls. Treaties of peace and leagues have oft been made
But how obferv'd, thou know'lt.

Hing. There was no bond

PTo make the former treaties fast and sure.
The peace I offer now fllall be confirm'd
By ties which bind the nations to each other.
M.y valiant brother left an only child,
In Denmark born, but here in England bred ;
Mlatchlefs in form and feature is the maid;
Straight as the pine that grows on Norway's hills.

Sh

She rites tall above the virgin-train:
Blue rolls her melting eye : Her heaving lreaft
Is whiter than the snow that's newly fall'n.
This maid of beauty I will give to ALFRED,
The pledge and bond of union and of peace.

(ALFRED remains f/eint.)

Why dost thou not reply ? Dost thou disdain
A bride of Danilf race ?

A/s. Silent I Rland

To learn the full extent of thy design.
Mea-n'ft thou not still to blend the nations more;
To mix the royal blood of either land;
And wed thyself a wife of English race ?

Hing. I do.

Als. And 'tis my bride that thou haft chosen.

Hilg. Call her not thine. Nothing belongs to thee.
A captive has no right.

Als. Thou keep'ft thy word,
And treat'ft me like a king !

Hing. I'll make thee one,

Which now thou art not. Wed the maid of Denmarkl
And o'er thy father's antient kingdom reign.

A/s. Unworthy I should be to reign,-to live,

If I could make such barter of my honour.
Is this the peace of HINGUAR ?

Hing. Yes: no other.
Als. Are there the terms that thou propound'ft to

ALFRED ?
HIrig. They are.

Als. I am a captive and unarm'd ;
So, with impunity, thou may'st insult me.

Hing. I stand allonihf'd at thy pride, thy folly.
Thou ruin'd ALFRED ! think of thy condition.

Thy

Thy life or death upon my nod depends.

A4s. Ruin'd I am; but it was human weakness,.

And no disgraceful fault, that ruin'd ALFRED.
Impell'd by tender, anxious, jealous love
Defpifng danger, to thy tents I came ;
And dost thou think I am so quickly alter'd ?
Dost thou imagine, that the dread of death
Can move my foul to yield to thee my bride ?
And lead, if mhe would follow me, to thame ?
I-INGUAR, the meanest man of Saxon race,
In freedom born, would from such balenefs ihrink;
And scorn with infamy to purchase life.

Hing. Thou tallk'R it well; and I have often heard

Of the persuasive eloquence of ALFRED.
Plain are my words: They speak thy certain doom.
If not the friend and firm ally of HINGUAR,
Thou dy'ft.

Als. My death will not conclude the war.

One course there is, if greatly thou afpir'lt
To reign supreme in England, and possess,
With honour gain'd, fair ETHELSWIDA'S charms.

I Hing. I do.
Als. Then mark me, Dane ! Tho' thou art sprung

From heroes more than human,-Odin's race,
Who ftretch'd the spear of conqueRi o'er the world;
And thou thyself, in war and battles bred,
Chain'd to thy sword fubmifilve fortune lead'ft;
ALFRED, whose fathers have in battle fali'n,
Whose valour ne'er could fix irconfRant fortune,
Offers to meet thee in the lifted field;
And, by his single arm, to thine oppos'd,
Decide the sovereignty of England's realm,
By the award of hcav'n. In this encounter,

My

My nobles and my people will abide ;
And, if thou conquer'ft, ETHELSWIDA'S thine.

Hing. What folly to presume, thou fall'n ALFRED !

That I will free my captive, and contend
With him on equal terms !

A . Brav'd as I was,.

I thought it fitting, thus, to meet thy scorn.
Perhaps I entertain'd a glimpse of hope,
That thou might chufe thus nobly to prevail,
To gain by valour warlike England's crown
And to the beauteous ETHELSWIDA come,
The vitor, not the murderer, of her husband.

Hing. The beauteous ETHELSWIDA has consented.

To give her hand. The terms which thou.difdain'ft,.
Vain-glorious Saxon! are more ample far,
Than those which she did stipulate for thee..
Thus she rewards the constancy of ALFRED.
Confider that.

A/s. No, not one moment, Dane.
Thy faith in love and war to me are known.

Hing. I will take no advantage of thy pafflon..

Hear my determin'd purpose: Thou (halt die,
Or wed the maid of Denmark. Heated now,
And chaff'd with keen contention, pride rebels.
Againfl thy reason. I will give thee time
To cool, and take the counsel of thy judgment..
One hour thou hall to think.
(To ERICK.) Conduat him hence.

Als. Prudence requires that HINGUAR too flould

think.

Behold yon banners Dtreaming to the wind,
The host of England will revenge their King.

[Exeunt ALFRED and ERICK.

*Hiiig

Iling. This ALFRED bears a high and haughty mind,

Notlikely to submit. Over his grave
The path of HINGUAR lies. When he is dead,
After a iform of rage, a flood of tears,
The changeful fly of wonman will grow clear,
And beauty's beams on the new lover shine.

Enter EDDA.

Edda. The tidings which I bring, my pardon plead
For this intrusion.

Hing. Say, what has befall'n ?

Edda. RONEX, the Queen, pursues the Captive's life.

ROLLO, devoted to her will, addrefs'd me,
With promises of infinite reward,
If I would lend my aid. When I refus'd,
He thrcaten'd me. The party of the Queen
Was firong enough, he said, by force to right her.

IHing. That was his errand here ?

fEdda. I feem'd to flight

His menaces. He kindled into rage
Swore, that the bravest chiefs of Denmark's host
Were in his tent aiTembled with the Queen,
And waited his return, to rife in arms,
And execute her orders.

Hing. I'll prevent them

And crush this nest of traitors. RoLLO'S tent;
That is the place ?

Edda. It is.

Hing. Look to thy charge.
Here thou art abfoltce the guards obey thee.

[Exit.
Manet

# ACT IV.

Manet EDDA.

This lovely Captive will at last be Queen.
I must endeavour to regain her favour.. [Exit.

End of the TItIRD ACT.

ACT IV.
SCENE, &c. as before.

ALFRED and ERICK.
Eric'.1F0OR England's and for ETHELSWIDA'S fake,

B To gain a little time, appear to yield.

'Ere this, the valiant EDWINs is inform'd
Of thy difaller. Night approaches fafl;
And Danilh discord aids the English arms.
Shew not thy foul so open to the Dane.

Als. My friend, to whom my favour has been fatJl,

It is thy fortune to behold the last
And darkest scene of ALFRED'S tragic life.
Something it grieves me, that mankind, who judge
By the event, perhaps may blame my rashness;
Do thou defend the allies of thy friend,
And publilh to the world-

Enter EDDA, who speaks to E.ICIK.

Edda. EIr.c ! the Captive

Desires once more to fee the Saxon Prince.
For thy permitfion to the King I'll answer.

Erick.

Erick. 'Tis not my part to question, but obey.

[Exit EDiA.
What can this woman mean ?

Als. SURREY, I tremble,

And, like a coward, flake from head to foot.
My mind for this encounter is not arm'd.
Stern was my preparation, firm the mail
That bound my breast, against approaching death.
This trial takes me on another quarter;
The woes of ETHELSVIDA !-Rife, my foul!
Against the storm. I ought to 'frengthen.her;
And stand myfelfa rock.

Enter ETIIELSWIDA and EDDA.

Edda. (to ERICK.) Retire with me;
Let their discourse be, as (he wishes, private.

[Exeunt ERICK and EDDA'
(ETHELSWIDA comes towards ALFRED with great

emotion.)

Als. 0, ETUELSWIDA, do not pierce my heart,
Vith looks so full of pity and of love !

Eth. My foul looks thro' my eyes. My love, my lord,
My king, my husband !

/f. Oh ! thou fann'ft the fire,

On which my reason ashes heaps, in vain.
Like Hercules, I wear the poifon'd robe:
Thou pull'fi the garment; and my nerves are torn.
Why didft thou wifi to fee the ruin'd ALFRED ?

Eth. Not ruin'd yet. His love endanger'd ALFRED:
My love shall save him flill.

A/s. Can there be truth
In HINGUAR ? Now, my foul begins to fear.

Eth. What dofl thou fear ?

1f.

Aif. The weakness of thy sex.

Eth. The weakness of my fcs !-I guess thy thoughts.
What did the tyrant fay of EriiELswivD. ?

A/s. What I defpis'd, discredited, and fcorn'd.

He said, that he. had fought and won thy love:
That thou confented'ft to become his bride.

Eth. On what conditions ?

A/s. Then, thou didft consent!
Hear! men and angels hear !

El. Angels and men,

And ALFRED, hear and judge. To save thy life,
To top the bloody tyrant's lifted arm,
I did consent, on this express condition,
That HINGUAR inlsantly ihould set thee free.
When certain of thy safety, ALFRED, then
I was prepar'd and arm'd to mock the Dane-
To die.

As. Forgive me, noblest of thy sex;

Greater than fancy'd heroine of the song5
Forgive the wrong I offer'd to thy virtue.

Eth. Accept thy freedom ; let my hand restore

The king of England to his injur'd. people,
Robb'd of their hero by my luckless love.
And when the time liall come, as come it will,
Unless the planet of this hour (hould strike,
That ALFRED his predicted fate fulfills;
And in the circle of his empire fits,
With glory crown'd, remember ETHELSWIDA,
Who died, exulting, to preserve her Lord.

Als. Remember thee ! This is no time to speak,

To ope' the flood-gates of my bursting heart.
Remember thee ! Whatever be my fate,
Thou ne'er (halt be forgot, while Albion lifts

F Her

Her head above the waves. But know, my love,
That this barbarian never was sincere:
For other terms to me he has propos'd ;-
A Danilh bride.

Etb. To thee a Danifli bride !

AIf. Or instant death, to follow the refusal.
Etb. ALFRED, thou liv't !-

A/s. I live till he returns.

For, tho' I fcorn'd his offer, he perfified;
Gave me one hour more calmly to confider.-
The time's expir'd.

Eth. Thou mufl not, shalt not die.
Rather-

A/s. Rafli is the counsel of affection.

I know the chara&er of HINGUAR well.
Nor life nor liberty will he beflow
On those whom he has wrong'd. If I {hould wed
The Danith maid, I but embrace dishonour,
And perifl with addition of difgracc.

Etb. What means the crafty Dane ?

As. I think he meant

To circumvent the foul of ET-riLSwrnA.
Should I consent to wed a Daniil bride,
lIe hopes to rouze the woman in thy heart,
And profit by the ragc of lilghted beauty.

Eth. Perhaps the women of his savage land

I-alve taught him thus to judge of womankind.
If they are like the clouds, that change their form,
A'nd, careless, fly before each fnifting gale,
Far different is the foul of ETHELSW'IDA.
ALFRED, thy love is dearer than my life.
Dearer than both, is ALtFED's life or fame.
In this extreme diltrels, remove me far

Exclude

Exclude me from thy thoughts; suppose me dead ,
And aft as if I never had been born.

Als. Thy magnanimity gives edge to mine.

Rather than wed the Danish maid, I die:
Yet to elude the deadly rage of HI-NGUAR,
And wait the chances of the coming night,
Big with event-

Enteri ERICK.

Erick. My Lord, a num'rous band,

Led by the Queen and the fierce I3othnic chief,
Surrounds the tents.

A/fi Give me a sword;

Erick. Take this.

If thro' their squadrons I can win my way,
At midnight I return. [Exit.

Als. One moment past,

On whose uncertain wing perdition floats;
The next may bring salvation. 0, my love !
Ere RONEX comes, retire ! Shun the first flock
Of her impetuous rage.

Eih. Here I remain,

And live or die with thee. To.fly from her,
Were to confess myself the wretch (le thinks me.
I'll meet her, as I ought. Wrong'd by her hate
And by her husband's love, my innocence
I will not plead; but urge my injuries,
And crave of her redress.

RONEX, Entering with Danii/ Soldiers.

Ron. Spare those that yield:
Kill all that dare refill. (Seeing ETHELswIDA.)

See, where fleitands,
E 2 Like

Like an enchantress, in the magic circle.
Advance and seize her.

.tf. (Drawving hisJiword.) Hold ! he dies that

flirs,

Till I have spoken. Thear, mistaken Queen !
And learn from me how wide thy anger errs.

Ron. Ha ! who art thou, that bear'ft so brave a form-?

Yet in this place, to shame devoted, dwell'ft
The pander and the guard of HINGUAR'S love.
What is thy name ?

Jlf. My name ?

Ron. Fear'ft thou to tell ?

Als. It will amaze thee much: My name is ALFRED.
Ron. The King of England!

A.C/. Yes.

Ron. Thou look'ft a King ?-
Yet moRt incredible thou should'st be ALFRED.

Eth. Not more incredible, than that the person,

Whose life thy rash resentment now pursues,
Is ALFRED'S bride, the Princess ETHELSWIDA,
Born of a race diflionour never flain'd,
And to the frieift rules of virtue bred.
My foul, O Queen, devoted to my Lord,
But one affetion knows, and worse than death
Abhors the love of HINGUAR. Thy protetion
Mly sex demands, and my misfortunes claim.
Embrace this fair occasion to be just,
And generously repair the cruel wrong
Thy thoughts have offered to my spotless fame.

Ron. The Princess ETHELSWIDA !-DO I dream ?

Or does each waking sense assure a scene
Of things and persons, more incredible
Than ever vision of the night combin'd ?

Enter

Enlter ROLLO. .

Rol. Odin be prais'd ! I come in tine to save them.

Hearken, my liege, to faithful ROLLO'S voice.
This is the King of England !

Ron. I believe it.

Before thou cam'ft, he had himself reveal'd.
His royal presence warrants what he is.
Princess, the hatred and the fell intent,
With which, confessedly, at first I came,
Do not relate to thee, unlike in all,
To the imagin'd object of my wrath.
My error pardon; and my deeds ihall fliew
The pity, which I feel for thy misfortunes;
The high elleem, in which I hold thy virtue.

Eth. Thy pity for distress, thy love of virtue,

Nobly thy deeds may prove. Deliver ALFRED,.
The vitim of his love and of his virtue.
Long is the tale, too long to tell it now.
But HINGUAR'S voice has doom'd my Lord to death,
Because to him he would not yield his bride,
If, then, the cause of that decree offend thee,
Treat with the King of England, and prevent it.

Rol. By Thor's right arm, the lady counsels well.

Renounce all thoughts of amity with HINGUAR,
Who never will forgive thy friends or thee,
The insult of this day.-Unite with England,
And give the nations peace.

Ron. Thy daring foul

Soars to the highest pitch of bold emprize.
But will the Danish chiefs adopt thy counsel ?

Rol. Make trial prove their hearts; if they. hould',

faint,

F 3 Ruin

Ruin abides them. They have gone too far,
With safety to recede. If he who draws
His sword against a King, away should throw
The useless scabbard ; what ought he to do,
Who draws his fvord against a fell usurper,
Who dares not ihow the mercy of a Prince ?

Ron. That argument come3 near. I'll urge it home;

And, when we have consulted and refolv'd,
The King of England then-

Als. To their demands

Will cordially agree. A common cause,
In time of danger, leads to sure accord.

[Exeunt RONEX and ROLLOo

Alanent ALFRED and ETHELSWIDA.

Aif. My love, look up; and, with a face of joy,
Welcome the dawn of hope.

ERb. Us'd to despair,

Like one in darkness long immur'd, as yet
I relish not the light.

Al/s Soon shalt thou fee

The rock of danger prove the rock of refuge i
And from the foe we dreaded safety come.

Eth. Still I fufpe& the faith of Danish friends..

But, most of all, my foul diflrulls the Queen,
That furious woman, who puts off the sex;
And, in her rage, againit her husband arms.

Als. Let us of what she is avail ourselves

And, o'er the bridge she builds, the torrent cross,
Which roars unfordable.

Eth. Before she came,

Of the approaching night, big with event,
Thou waft about to speak. Fain wou'd I hear

Of

Of ought that's good, and not deriv'd from RONEX.

AXf. This hour,-for now the Ihades of night descend,

A chosen band, by valiant Edwin led,
Draw near the Danish camp; and, in the wood,
My orders wait. If noble SURREY lies -
Deeds will be done to night.

Eih. And HINGUAR too,
He 'will not slumber.-See, the Dane returns !

Enter ROLLO.

Rollo. The Queen of Denmark and the chiefs, in council
Thy presence wait, to fix their last resolve.

l/s. Whate'er on me depends, they may command.

[Exeunt ALFRED and ROLLO.

Manet ETHELSWIDA.

Is the defef peculiar to myself ?

Or is it incident to womankind,.
By sudden itrong impressions to be fway'd ?
The image of this dreadful RONEX haunts me i
And, like a ghost, excites inhuman fears.
When I was tofs'd upon a sea of peril,
In which my foot could. reach no ground of hope,
I swam with courage on the flormy waves.
In flhallower water now, fearful I wade,
And reel at every surge. She gaz'd on ALFRE-D i
Avow'd her admiration of his form.-

Enter EDDA.
Edda. Lady, I bring alarming news.

Eth. To whom ?
Edda. To thee.-When thou haft heard my tidings,

judge.

Among the Danifli captains, one there is,
To me by blood and friendship ftrikly join'd:

He

He told me, that the chiefs at lafi agreed
To join with England, upon this condition,
That English ALFRED weds the Danish Queen.

Eth. I saw it in her eyes; foretold my fate.
Should he refuse, what.then

Edida. In that event,.

Thliey mean to treat with HINGUAR, and restore
To him his captives. But'their hope is high,
That ALFRED will consent.

Eth. Not, whillt I live.-

But will the Danes permit a woman's life
To stand a wall between them and their purpose ?
The rage of RONEX, like a swelling wave,
Over that slender mound will burfi amain:
Woman to woman is the felleft foe.

Edda. And such a woman, search from end to end-

The world, all nations and religions try,,
There is not to be found a parallel
To this unprincipl'd, unbridl'd RONEX..
The passion of the moment, is the God
She always serves.

Eth. Alas! What shall I do,
Who in the level of her fury stand ?

Edda. RONEX, thy deadly foe, is also mine.

Ere now, beneath her hatred I had fall'n,
But for my pow'rful friend.

Eth. Thy friend !-Is he
High in command ?

Edda. To Bothnic ROLLO next.

Many and brave the warriors he commands.
Behind thy tent the passage to the plain,
This night, he guards.

Eth. My hopes revive again.

Should

Should I escape, or if perchance I pfrilh,
No more my destiny entangles ALFRED.
For me the eagle left his airy way,
And, stooping in my track, his freedom lotr
EDDA, if pity of my loft estate
Can move a woman's heart, or vast reward
Induce thy foul to do an aa humane,
Persuade thy friend.

Edda.. To what ?

Eth. To let me pals.
Edda. Then, whither wilt thou go ?

Eth. If I can gain

The Ihelter of the neighb'ring wood, I'm safe.
But any place I hold more safe than this.
Wilt thou assist me ?

Edda. I embrace thy fate.

Thro' the dark night, and- thro' surrounding arms,
I Ihall attend thee hence, ifI can win
My friend to guide our fleps.' Forthwith, I'll try.
Please to thy tent repair.

Eth. I wrong'd thee once;

And thou, at last, haft prov'd thyself my friend.
With perse& trust, my foul on thee relies.
May angels prompt thy tongue. [Exit.

,laint EDDA.

No art of mine;

The dread of RONEX, working on her mind,
Conjur'd each fpe&re up I wilh'd to raise.
I'll guide her fleps committed to my care
And lead her safe to HINGUAR's longing arms.

End of the FOURTH ACT.

ACT

# ACT V.

AC T V.
SCENE, The Tents.--At a dijiance moun-

tains and trees; the moon in crescent, and
the Jfiae darkened.

LEnter ETHELSWIDA.
Eth. TJ AD she not fail'd, ere this {he had return'd.

Unbraced by vain fufpence and expectation,

My spirit flags; and, like a racer tir'd,
Swerves in the course. I am not what I was.
Hark to that hollow found !-Is it the hum
Of voices roll'd together in the wind ?
Or roars the blast of autumn through the woods ?
Alas, I was not wont to fear the night.
When wand'ring on the pleasant banks as Trent,
By moon-light, oft I trac'd the glittering stream,
And mus'd on ALFRED. Peaceful were the founds,
And to my temper tun'd, which then I heard.
My fieps, light as they were, amongst the leaves,
From her high roost the fluttering ltock-dove fcar'd;
Or ltartled from his lair the bounding flag.
Begirt with armies now, hemm'd round with spears,
I fear at every ftep to route a foe.
Thro' the dim shades, behold a human form.
'Tis EDDA.-Ah ! what tidings ?

Enter EDDA.

Edda. Good-and bad.
Eth. Of ALFRED what ?

EdlAa.

Edda. Enrag'd at his refusal

To wed their willing Queen, the Danish chiefs
His sword demanded, and to ROLLO gave
Charge of his person. Still they fit in council
New courses to devise.

Eth. Would I were hence,

Before those dreadful counsellors determine!
What fays thy friend ?

Edda. He answers for thy safety,
If firm thy purpose be, this night to fly.

Eth. Blest be thy tongue !

Edda. What else remains to fay
Or do the cover of the tent will hide.

Eth. Yet, ere I plunge into the itream of fate, (kIeels)

Angels ! and faints! who once yourselves were human !
Now perfet spirits! and, with seraphs mix'd,
Administer to heav'n's eternal King !
0, hear my suppliant voice, and to the throne
Where Sovereign mercy fits, prefer the prayer
Of one in deep distress ! who, in the hour
Of her prosperity, never forgot
To bow before your lirines ! Gracious descend !
Thro' darkness, night, and death, my footiteps guide !
But, if I'm doom'd, in the rough path to fall,
O ! guard the King of England ! from the rage
Of cruel foes-preferve the life of ALFRED !

[Exeunt to the tent.

Enter ROLLO, with two Dani//7 Soldiers.
Rollo. It is the Queen's command.

jjf Sol. The warrant's good.
The Queen commands our swords.

2d Sol. Yes, to kill men,

Arm'd

'Arm'd and resisting; that's a soldier's talk.
To kill a helpless woman likes me not.

Rollo. If you demur !-
(Stirs Soldier speaks aide to the second; then turns t«

ROLLO.)

rJ? Sol. My Lord, we are refolv'd.

Rollo. I know you resolute and secret both j

SeleAed you as worthy of reward,
Befitting such a service.

ifJ Sol. We'll perform it.

Rollo. The deed, when done, must never be avow'd ;

But to the chance of this unruly night
Solely imputed.

lj Sol. Silent is the grave !-
Whoever fees us dies.

2d Sol. Look there my Lord,

(ETHELSWIDA and EDDA in the back ground.)

Who may they be, who yonder steal along,
Timid their ftep and mien ?

Rollo. Forthwith pursue.

She in the azure mantle is the .Princess.
Of her make sure. [Exeunt the Danes.

Manet ROLLO.

Not without .much regret,

Did I consent to ETHELSWIDA'S death.
Mv.foul was loth to hurt the lovely maid;
Loth to put out the radiant star of beauty,
Ere half her course was run. Neceflity
Impos'd this deed on my relucant mind.
For, tho' the isar was bright, fie beam'd deftrucion;
And, like a comet, from her tresses Ihook
Discord and war.

Enter

Enter RONEX,

Ron. Are my commands obey'd ?

iollo. Just as my soldiers were about to enter, .

And execute their orders, from the tent,
Witl silent Rteps, fhe.ftole: they saw, purfu'd,
And have, ere now, o'ertaken.

Ron. Speed their swords !-

My fortune, now, is on the anvil placed,
For fate to strike and falhion good or evil.
HINGUAR comes on, dark as the night that shades him.

Rollo. He shall be met.

Enter MESSENGER..

Me:. Hail, sovereignty of Denmark !

A foe, whom we expected not, draws near;
The host of England--

Rollo. Ha

~- VMe.g Cover the plain.

Along their line, I heard the voice of ERICK.
That traitor leads them on.

Rollo. Caught in a net,
Spread by the hand of chance !-

Ron. What shall we do ?
What refuge now in counsel, or in arms ?

Rollo. The King of England is our only refuge.

Make him thy friend j and he will quickly turn,
On HINGUAR'S troops, the torrent of his arms.

Ron. No choice is left. Fly, and bring ALFRED

hither. - (7o the OFFICER,
Rollo. In pledge of amity, restore his sword.

Mianent ROLLO and RONEX.
Ron. ROLLO, thou look'ft as if thou didft repent

G What

What we have done. My foul's a contant fiream,
Which knows no changeful ebb.

Rollo. If ALFRED ihould
Desire to fee that ETHELSWIDA'S safe-

Ron. I'll find an answer fit. He comes. Behold him.

O'er his six'd eye, his frowning brows projet.
His mind is high wound up.

Enter ALFRED.

Rollo. Now, King of England,

Let no resentment of the past provoke
Thy foul to judge, with paflion, of the present.
HINGUAR, thy mortal foe, comes on refolv'd,
His lovely prize, by valour, to regain.
Oppos'd to him we stand, equal in arms.
But from their hill the Englilh host descend,
To turn the scale of combat. Dost thou wilh
The tyrant to prevail

As. Answer diret

Thy quefRion needs not. HINGUAR is my foe.
Grant me those equal terms I ask'd at firit,
And to your arms I join the force of England.

Ron. Thy terms are more agreeable to RONEX,

Than those the policy of Denmark nam'd.
By Frea, eldest goddess of the fly,
The ancient arbiter of human things,
I fvear to the performance.

,/if: In that tent,

If ETIELSVIDA refis, I wish to fee her.
Ron. Far from this fpot,vwhere -::I . points his march,
The Princess to a safer place is mov'd,
Near my pavilion.

ajf. Ha!

Enter

Enter MESSENGER,

Me. .A fierce attack
Is on the right begun.

Rollo. The troops of England !-

If ALFRED gives his aid, it muff be now.
This officer will on thy steps attend, '
And to the Danish chiefs announce thy purpose.
That is the way direc. Along this path
I go to combat HINGUAR. . [Exit ROLLO.

Als. Queen of Denmark,

To the affliaed Captive comfort give.
She is the bond and cement of our friendship.

[Exit ALFRED.

Ron. Then we shall ne'er unite. He does fufpet me.

He rivetted on mine his jealous:eyes.
There is no proof, and I will brave the suspicion
With loud appeals, with vows and protestations,
Of purest innocence.-That flout is near;
It comes against the wind:-My foes prevail.
Nearer and rearer fill !-'Tis time to fly.
On one fide ALFRED,. on the other HINGUAR.
Here let them meet, and fight for ETHELSWIDA. [Exit.

Hing. (behind thefcenes.) Pursue along the vale ; the

leaders kill;
But spare the common men.

Enter HINGUAR with Soldiers.

HItizg. This is the place.

Now I have reach'd the port of my desire.
The prize of love and conquest anchors here.
Where' are the guards? where flie, whom they llould

guard ?
What does this awful solitude portend ?

G 2 Enter,

Enter, from the oppojite fide of the flage, the two As-

SASSINS, with the robe of ETHELSWIDA, Jlainedwith
blood.
ift ass.. Twice have we chang'd our course. To

keep this robe
We lose ourselves,

Hing; By, Hela's fulphur'd fires,

The robe of'ETHELswmA, fiain'd with blood !
Infernal villains !-

2d 4faj. Caught, undone,-the King!
Ift Aqfa. (throwing down the mantle.) We are but

instruments to work the will
Of our superiors.

Hing. Have you kill'd the lady
Who own'd this garment ?

iRft iJ To deny were vain.
The Queen commanded us, and we. obey'd.

2d If.Jaj. We know our fate; and we will die like men.
Hing. Long shall you live in pain, and wish for death,

The ragged falw hall tear your tortur'd limbs;
And when your carcasses are all one wound,
Fastened on iron hooks you fhall:be hung,
And die by inches.-Bear them to'their fate.

[Exeunt guarded.

Enter MESSENGER.
Mefl. My Lord, the troops which on the left ad-

vanc'd,

Attack'd, and soon fubdu'd the guards of RONEX;
But, charg'd by Engliih ALFRED, in their turn,
Before him fly.

Hing. My trumpets !-found a charge
And call the firaggling soldiers to my spear.

The

The charm, that drew me to this spot, w1ill bring
The Saxon hither.-Odin, brace my arm,
And let my sword, like thine own thunder, fall'
On ALFRES'S crest. (The trumpets found.)
Enter ALFRED, with Englilh Soldierst and.the OFFICERP

ofthe firfl Ac. -
A/s. Behold the man !-

Hing. Wlofe fleei '
Shall pierce thy heart.

A/s. Thy menaces, Barbarian,

Tho' fierce'and rude, become thee better now,
Than when I heard them last.

Hi/g.. I threatened then;
And now I will perform.

,/f. My foldicrsbrave
Restrain your ardour.-

(To HINGUAR.) Spare thy people, King! -

Let us, alone, in mortal firife engage,
Whilst every Dane and Saxon Ihall look on,
And by the fortune of their Prince abide.

HSing. 'Tis what I wish'd; but did not think thou dirft
Come from the crowd, and, single, meet.my arm.

Als, In more than this mistaken : But, by deeds;
Not words, I' will convince thee.

Hing: Prompt thy tongue i
But flow thyhand. Come'on; Odin for Denmark !

- (Draws.
As. For England and her' King, the living'Gbo !i

(They fight, HINGUARfalls.,
Now, where is HINGUAR'S pride' '

Hing. Here, in his heart;
G 3' -Unconquer!d-

Unconquer'd lill, the pride of HINGUAR dwells.
To die in battle is a warrior's death.
The hero fights and falls ; but never yields.
HINGUA.R has fought. From sea to sea, his sword,.
Thro' England blaz'd, a meteor dropping blood.
'he wolf and eagle follow'd to the feast,
Tracking its course.. The warriors old in arms,.
The youthful chief, by many a virgin lov'd,
Lay reeking- in their gore.

Als. As thou dost now !

The virgin's and the widow's curse have found thee,.
And laid in dust the troubler of the land.

fling. In dull thy hopes are laid. Behold that robe.
Belike, thou know'fr it.

A/s. ETHELSWiDA'S robe,.

With bloody gashes torn ! More fell than bears
That flarve on hill of snow, how durlt thou lift
Thy cursed hand ?

Hing. No. ETHELSWIDA fell-

By RoNEX. Yet, altho' I killed her not,
Her death delights me. Saxon, I rejoice
At thy calamity. Happy my lot,
Compar'd with thine. To the Valkyrian maids
I go, to Odin and the hall of joy.
Thou, of thy Love bereft, shalt waite thy days
In lamentation, like the wretch who pines
By Hela's lake, and drinks the poifon'd fiream,
Pour'd from the jaws of snakes. I laugh at thee,
And, like my fathers,, die. (Dies.

Als. His dying voice

Of me prophetic spake. 0, ETHELSWIDA !.
And SURREY too ! in ALFRED'S cause has fallen.
Now on the top, the summit of affiction,

Like

Like a-tree, fiript of bark and branch; I stand} '
Bare on all fides, and naked to the fiorm . (Fals..

(Voice'behind the Scenes.)

Where is the conquering King, my'Lord, my husband?
Make way and let me rulh-wvhere is'my ALFRED ?
ETHELSWIDA enters antdfes him. ('EDWIN following.)

Eth.. Eternal powers !. Is this the scene of joy ?

(Aifter a pause, looking at iie robe.).

I am the cause accurit of ALFRED'S death,
And England's ruin. Bear me wiitnefs, heav'n !-
But words are vain. Let those be*ail their doom,/
Who live to susser, and prolong their pain.
The gleam of hope, extinguith'd by despair,.
Sharpens my sense of misery, and spreads
A deeper horror on my .tortur'd mind.
My sure, and now my only friehd,'come forth.

(Drawsq dagger.)
Spirit of ALFRED, flay ! (ALFRED revives.)

As.: The hiades of death,

Still swim before my eyes. I heard the ghost,
Of ETHELSWIDA call

Eth. He lives, he lives!.
My heart furcharg'd, burfis with a flood of joy.

4'/s..Her voice, her.form ; 'tis the, 'tis she herself!
My ETIELSWIDA! ( Runs into her arms.)

Eth. ALFRED !' Gracious heav'n !
For ever bless thy providence divine! -: -

A/s. In error loft, upon the brink-we tlood;

Of bottomless perdition. 0, my-love,
Most certain feem'd thy death.

Eth. I saw thee dead,
And rais'd my arm to join my lot to thine.

is/s

Als. I heard the dagger fall. It was referv'd

For thee, thou pride and glory of thy sex,
To give the noblest proof of love-and live.

Eth. E'er since the fad commencement of our woes;

Dcep-on my heart engrav'd was the resolve,
Not to furvive.thee in the Rorms of fortune.
That anchor held like fate.

/f. Whence came that sign
Which friends and foes deceiv'd

Eth. True was the sign

Of death. The wearer of my garment died,
For me mistaken.

, l/s. 'Twas a wounded mind

Which laid me low. Opprefs'd with grief I funk.
EDWIN, my friend-

Devon. Complete is EDWIN'S joy,
To fee his Prince with love and glory crown'd.

A/s. The scene is ghaflly, and with death deform'd.

In place more fitting, of our friends and foes,
According to desert, we will decree.
The nations now are one ; with HINGUAR died
The' enmity of England and of Denmark.
My people with their monarch {hall be blest,
Whlit such a partner of my empire reigns.

Eth. Nor shall the story of the toils of ALFRED

Sink to oblivion, in the tide of time,
Or to posterity descend in vain.
From hence the people of the land he lov'd,
And future Princes of that land may learn,
Fearless to fern the torrent of disaster,
And ne'er of England, or themselves, despair.

SI NIS.

# EPILOGUE. BY MR GARRICK.

EPILOGUE.

BTMR GARRICK.
OUR bards, of late, so itar'c in their calling,

Havefcarcepreferv'd one heroine from falling .

Whether the dame be widow, maid, or wife,
Shefeldom from their hands efcapesr with life.
If this green cloth couldsJeak, would it not tell,
Upon its well-worn nap how oft Ifell?'
To death, in various frms deliver'd urp,
Steel kills me one night, and the next the Cup.
The tragic process is arJhort, as certain;
With * THIS,-or f THIS, 1 drop-then drops the curtain.
No faint can lead a better life than-I,
For halfisfpent i]i Judy'ng how to die.
The learn'd -dpute, how Tr'agedies Jlould end;
0, happily,ayJfome-Soome death defend.
Mild critics wish goodfortune to the good;.
Whileothers, hot-brain'd, roarfor blood! blood! blood!--
The fair, tho' nervous, tragic to thefoul,
Delights in daggers, and the pofon'd bowl.
" I would not give a black-pin for a Play,
" Unless in tenderness I melt away:
" From pangs and death no lovers would I save, }
" They should be wretched, and.defpair and rave

And ne'er together lie-but in tihe grave !" J

The brave rough soldier, a soft heart dicovers; .
Hefiwears and weeps at. once, when dead the lovers:

* She makes the motion of stabbing..
t And here ofdrinking.poifon.

[ 70 3

As down his cheeks run trickling nature's tide,
" Damn it-I wish those young ones had not dyd :"'
Tho'fromn his eyes the drop ofpity falls,
He fights like Caesar, when his country calls.
Infpite of critic laws, our bard takes part,
And joins in concert with the soldier's heart.
0 let your feelings with thir party fide,
For once forgive me that I have not dy d;
Too hard that fate, which kills a virgin bride ! J
