"OBSERVATIONS UPON A PAMPHLET, INTITLED, An Analysis of the Moral and Religious Sentiments contained in the Writings OF SOPHO, and DAVID HUME, Esq;  "
"A PAMPHLET having made its appearance lately, intitled, An Analysis of the Moral and Religious Sentiments contained in the Writings of SOPHO , and DAVID HUME, Esq, Addressed to the consideration of the Reverend and Honourable Members of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland; a few observations, which have occurred upon it, are here submitted to the public. The author zeal for religion would deserve the highest commendation, if, in some instances, it did not seem to be misguided, in others to exceed the bounds of true piety."
"T HE freedom of inquiry and debate, though  it may have published some errors to the world, has undoubtedly been the source from whence many blessings have flowed upon mankind. As free inquiry alone could at first have been made for Christianity, and have borne down the opposition of synagogues, senates and schools; it is to the same noble principle we owe the Reformation, and are enabled to set at defiance the tyrannical decisions of Popes and Councils. By means of free inquiry, the church of Scotland was originally established. In this country, therefore, all attempts to infringe so valuable a privilege in cases where the peace of society is not concerned, must ever be regarded with concern by all reasonable men."
"The proper objects of censure and reproof are not freedom of thought, but licentiousness of action; not erroneous speculations, but crimes pernicious to society. Against these ought the Clergy to exert their utmost efforts; and by such a conduct they will more advance the cause of religion, than by engaging in metaphysical disputes, which may perplex the understandings, but never can impair the morals of men."
"THE intention of the following observations is by no means to enter into any controversy, but solely to examine, whether the Author of the Analysis has not, in many instances, misrepresented the meaning, and quoted unfairly the words of those books he would expose to censure. It will be admitted without dispute, that, to cite one part of a paragraph, and omit the other, which  clares or explains the meaning of the author, is no less culpable than to falsify the words."
"THE first Proposition of the Analysis is,—"
"There is no necessary relation between cause and effect."
"T prove this to be the doctrine of the Author of the Essays on the Principles of Morality, several passages are adduced; two from  274. and 275. and one from  296. These passages, though  they do not directly prove the proposition, yet it must be owned, that, as they stand in the Analysis, they have a great tendency towards it; but when those which immediately follow them are added, the direct contrary proposition appears evidently to be maintained. Thus the Analysis quotes,  5. "
"THE last citation is so unfairly culled from a page where both what goes before, and what follows it, contradict the proposition of the Analysis, that it is but fair to transcribe it entire. "
"The second proposition of the Analysis is—"
"Matter is possessed of a power of self-motion."
"H the Analysis said endued instead of possessed, the proposition had been fairly stated, or if citation from  12. of the Essay on motion had been continued, and those sentences in the middle which are purposely omitted, inserted; the doctrine would have appeared to be the same in this point with that which is maintained by the best and most orthodox philosophers."
"The paragraph immediately following the quotation is  14. "
"The third proposition of the Analysis is —"
"Nothing appears from reason that can induce us to think that the world is not eternal."
"NOTHING can be more remote from the doctrine of the Essays than the eternity of the world. The context of the three citations from  317, 318, and 319. which is purposely omitted, would sufficiently prove this to any man of candour. But the passage in  344. must remove all dispute upon this point."
"TO follow the Analysis through  every article, would be tedious and disagreeable: one other instance shall only be adduced of this species of false quotation. The 5th Proposition is, The perfections of God are either such as we cannot prove, or cannot comprehend."
"T HE first citation is picked out from the midst of a paragraph, where the preceding and following passages are in direct contradiction to the proposition. The whole stands thus: "
"the passage cited in the Analysis. "
"I imagine it will scarcely be denied, that to quote thus, is to quote falsely, since, by the same method, any author might be made to speak things the most opposite to his sentiment. But, should there be any hesitation upon this point, it is undoubted, That when a treatise professes to give "
"IF there should be found passages which are neither the words, nor the meaning of the author, the falsehood cannot be palliated, nor excused."
"An instance of this method of citation occurs in  23. Art. 5. of the Analysis."
"The words quoted are, "
"page there is no such sentence, neither is there any such sentiment to be found. The passage from the beginning in  139, is as follows."
"THAT the words quoted in the Analysis are not to be found here is evident; it is almost as clear, that the sentiment contained in them is very different from the passage in the Essays. A very common observation is there advanced, viz. That the vulgar are more swayed by passion than principle, and not much influenced by general ideas. No man of candour can imagine this to be synonymous to the sentence quoted in the Analysis."
"A NOTHER instance of the same kind occurs in  15. of the Analysis. The words quoted are, "
"THE page from which they are cited is the 164. The passage is no where to be found in the page. It must indeed be acknowledged, that in the 7th line of the page, the 1st sentence of this passage is to be found. Some imperfect traces of the 2d sentence may be observed in the 20th line of the same page, and in the 8th line of the subsequent one, something like the last sentence may also be discovered."
"A ND I here ask, If it be candid or honest to cite an author in this manner, and to aver that the very expressions are quoted? To glean disunited sentences, to patch them together arbitrarily, to omit the limitations or remarks with which a proposition is delivered; can this be stiled exhibiting the sentiments of an author? I hope I shall not be thought to  viate into anything ludicrous, when I refer the Reader to a well known treatise of the Dean of St. Patrick  in which the inquisitorial method of interpretation used in the church of Rome is by so just and so severe raillery rendered detestable."
"Si non totidemsententiis, asttotidemverbis; si non totidemverbis, asttotidemsyllabis, si non totidemsyllabis, asttotidemliteris. This is the genuine logic of persecution. From arts such as these have the unhappy divisions which so long distracted the church been derived. At a period when mankind are fully sensible of the blessings they enjoy, and liberty both civil and ecclesiastical is become the dearest possession of the people, and the favourite care of the Prince; what sentiments ought the revival of those insidious and Jesuitical principles to excite in every sincere friend to our present constitution in Church and State! Most of the members of the Church of Scotland are, I dare say, animated with a fervent zeal for religion: But, knowing that the perfection of religion is the spirit of moderation, they prize too highly the good of the church to give ear to the counsels of a violent and unchristian zeal, which, by adopting the arts, may justly be thought to pursue the ends of persecution. More has perhaps been said upon those instances of (what must be called) direct falsehood in the author of the Analysis, than was at first proposed. But it cannot be surprising, that they should excite some indignation. To affect a zeal against heresy, and at the same time to disregard truth, must appear to every one highly culpable and very unchristian."
"I now only remains to quote those passages in which the Author of the Analysis seems to have wilfully mistaken the meaning of the Essays. It is but fair to suppose, that he has read the whole of the book before he would pretend to censure it. The only proof therefore of his misrepresentations shall be to cite those passages, which, upon this supposition, he could not be ignorant of."
"The fourth Proposition of the Analysis is, The powers of reason can give us no satisfying evidence of the being of a God."
"THE misrepresentation here consists chiefly in the query subjoined, which would induce us to believe, that the Author of the Essays disputed the Being of a God. The falsehood of this will appear from the following passages,  320. Ess. "
"The sixth Proposition of the Analysis is, It is whimsical and absurd to pretend, that the material world is subject to the providence of God."
"THE passages already quoted from Mr. Boyle are sufficient to set this in its true light."
"THE 7th Proposition being obviously true, if fairly understood, needs no comment."
"The eighth Proposition deserves some more attention. It is, Man is a mere machine, under an irresistible necessity in all his actions."
"IT is clear, from many passages in the Essays, that the Author no where meant to inculcate physical necessity.  172. "
"IT is clear also from the passage preceding that which is cited in the Analysis, from  163. that it is not a blind fatal necessity that is argued for, but a necessity derived from the will of the Deity."
"IF we insert into this quotation the sentence which is omitted in the Analysis, we shall have a very compleat instance of the unfair proceedings of its author: after he has a power of beginning motion, these words are omitted; "
"THAT man is under a moral necessity arising from the will of the Deity, is therefore the position of the Essays. It will scarcely be denied, that the doctrine of this church is the same, and that Calvin, Beza, Turretin, have all maintained it in their several systems. This subject is fully treated in the accurate Treatise lately published by the Reverend Mr. Edwards of New-England."
"THE 9th and 10th Propositions may be considered together, since unfairness of the Analysis here consists of imputing to an Author consequences which he refuses to admit."
"THE opinion of deceitful feelings we may justly call new and singular."
"We may hold it to be unphilosophical, or deny it to be true. But, I confess, I do not see how it can be stated as heretical, with regard to the consequence attempted to be deduced from it, "
"in the Analysis prove his opinion."
"Analysis,  21. cites a passage from  209. of the Essays: the sentence which begins the paragraph is as follows, "
"IN  20th of the Analysis, the passage cited from  63. of the Essays is, "
"follows is,) "
"The eleventh Proposition is—"
"That since man is thus necessarily determined in all his actions, and can have nothing more than a deceitful feeling of liberty, it follows as a necessary consequence, that there can be no sin or moral evil in the world."
"A passage, which could not have escaped the observation of the author of the Analysis, will best explain this proposition. It is a note on  182. "
"WERE the author of the Analysis to meet with no greater degree of candour than he has shewn to others; it were not unnatural to conclude, from his extracts from Mr. UME , that his zeal for religion was more affected than real. Every fair reader must admit, and regret, that there are to be found in the writings of this elegant Author some principles by no means consistent with sound doctrine. There was therefore no necessity for ascribing to him positions which he does not advance, in order to support the charge of irreligion against him. This conduct of the author of the Analysis can scarcely be accounted for; as it manifestly leads to do harm rather than good to the cause he pretends to support. But as it is more charitable to impute it to error than to evil intention, a very few observations upon it will suffice."
"THE first Proposition of the Analysis is,—"
"All distinction between virtue and vice is merely imaginary."
"E VERY one who has the most superficial knowledge of Mr. UME  writings must know, that he is very far from denying the reality of moral distinctions. The passages quoted by no means prove the proposition, neither are they fairly cited."
"THE first citation from  239. is the conclusion of a paragraph; the beginning of which is as follows; "
"THE second citation from  235. is as unfairly stated. The words which follow those quoted are; "
"THE third citation from  99.  2. ought to have been explained by what went before it, which is, "
"IT is by no means candid in the author of the Analysis to quote the passage from  29.  4. ‡ singly; because, as it stands in the Essay, it makes part of a reasoning, the tendency of which is by no means immoral, as the passage going before it clearly shews. "
"IN  31. of the Analysis, we find the following sentence cited from the Essays,  I .  163. "
"passage, which must be sought for in  162. is followed by "
"find the conclusion in these words, "
"WITH regard to the other propositions, it is sufficient to observe, that Mr."
"HUME ’ writings, to any candid reader, exhibit no defence of adultery; and are very far from containing any principles of licentiousness. Justice demands this acknowledgment as due to an elegant and agreeable writer, even though a Free-Thinker; and it must at the same time be observed, that it appears very like a contradiction to accuse a man in one page of scepticism and infidelity, and in the following page to tax him with an attachment to Popery and superstition."
"FROM the whole survey of this Analysis, the misrepresentations and false quotations contained in it are evident. It may now, therefore, be not improper to inquire a little into the scope of it."
"A number of the most horrible propositions are published in large letters, as extracted from the writings of two Gentlemen; and mangled perverted passages are produced, in order to prove so dreadful a charge. Many persons, it may be thought, will never go farther than the Propositions themselves, which are certainly sufficient to excite detestation in every sober Christian. Very few, it may be presumed, will look beyond the passages by which the Propositions seem to be supported, or consult the books from which these passages are extracted: and still fewer are capable of discernment on so delicate a subject. By arts such as these, are the characters of two Gentlemen attacked and defamed. The public will judge with how little justice, and how little candour this attack has been carried on. It is unnecessary to add any thing further. The Observations have been confined mostly to matters of fact. All reflexions upon the author of the Analysis, even after so full a detection, have, it is hoped, been avoided. As in common life, the habit of a clergyman ought to secure a regard to the wearer, even though it should happen to cover envy, malice, and falsehood; so ought a zeal for religion, whether real or affected, to be always treated with proper respect."
