"The history of the progress and termination of the Roman Republic. By Adam Ferguson, ... In three volumes. ..."
"S I STORY"
"O PROGRESS AND TERMINATION"
"OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC."
"B 0 I."
"C A  I. Yhe Sbdjecl.-Stlppofed Origin of the Roman State."
"-Its Government.--The King.-Setnate.-People. Curice.-Centurie ribeTries.-Reigion.--The Tri- umph.-Original Maxims.-Progrefs of the State under its Kings.-Change to a Republic."
"H Roman State was originally a small prin- I. cipality, and one of the many little cantons, CA. which, under the denomination of Latins, occupied the left of the Tiber,from its confluence with theAnio to the Sea, and from Oitia to Circeii on the coast. Within.this narrow tract, reaching in breadth land no more than sixteen miles, and extending on the coast about fifty miles, the Latins are said to have formed no less than forty-feven independent itates (a); each of whom had a separate capital or"
"(a) Dionyr. Halicar.    I. frong"
"B o strong hold, to which they occasionally retired for-"
". safety, with their cattle and other effecs, and from"
"which they made frequent wars on each other  ... The country, divided into so many separate terri- tories, we may confider as resembling some of the lately discovered islands in the Southern or Pacific Ocean  ,where every height is represented as a for- trefs, and every little township, that can maintain its possessions, as a separate slate. Among fettle- ments of this description, the Romans, though they were originally no way diftinguiflled in point of poffeflions or numbers, yet, in consequence of some superiority of inlfitution or character, they came to have a decided ascendant."
"Beyond the Tiber onr the one hand, and the Liris on- the other, the contiguous parts of Italy were possessed, in the fame manner with Latium, by ferent races of men, who, under various denomina- tions of Etrurians, Samnites, Campanians, and others, formed a multiplicity of little nations, united by leagues for common safety, and ranged under opposite interefis, with a view to oime balance of power which they endeavoured to maintain. The peninsula towards one extremity  , was from time immemorial peopled with Grecian colonies. Tow- ards the other, it was, in the first ages of the Ro- man state, over-run by nations of Gaulish ex- traftion  ."
"The land throughout, hi refpe& to situation, cli- mate, and foil, was highly favoured, diversified. with mountain and plain, well wooded and water-  replenished with useful materials, fit to yield pasture for numerous herds, and to produce abun- dance of corn, wine, and oit. And, what is fiill of more importance, was already become the flou- rifhing nursery of ingenious men, ardent and vigo- ( ')   i.  5,     See Cook Voyage to New Zealand.  Magna CGzcui. ( ) Gallia Cifalpina."
"70 sl- '"
"rous in their pursuits, though, in refpe& to manyc A  arts and inventions, yet in a itate of great fimplici- ty or ignorance."
"The Romans, who made their firit ftep to domi- nion by becoming heads of the Latian confederacy, continued their progress to the sovereignty of Italy; or, after many struggles with nations poffefled of resources similar to their own, united the forces of that country under their own dirEtion, became the conquerors of many kingdoms in Asia and Africa, as well as in Europe; and formed an empire, if not the most extensive, at least the molt splendid of any that is known in the history of mankind. In pof- session of this seeming advantage, however, they were unable to preserve their own institutions; they became, together with the conquests they had made, a prey to military government, and a signal ex- ample of the viciflitudes to which prosperous nati- ons are exposed."
"This mighty Rate, remarkable for the'fmallnefs of its origin, as well as for the greatness to which it attained, has, by the splendor of its national exer- tions, by the extent of its dominion, by the wis- dom of its councils, or by its internal revolutions and reverses of fortune, ever been a principal ob- ject of history to all the more enlightened nations of the western world. To know it well, is to know mankind and to have seen our species under the fairest aspeA of great ability, integrity, and cou- rage. There is a merit in attempting to promote the study of this subjed, even if the effect should not correspond with the design."
"Under this impreflion the following narrative was undertaken, and chiefly with a view to the great revolution, by which the republican form of go- vernment was exchanged for despotism; and by which the Roman people, from being joint fove- reigns of a great empire, became, together with their own provinces, the fubjets, and often the"
"B prey,"
"B o prey, of a tyranny which was equally cruel to"
"-both."
"As in this revolution men of the greatest abilities, pofeffed of every art, and furnished with the most ample resources, were acting in concert together, or in opposition to each other, the scene is likely to exhibit what may be thought the utmoit range or extent of the human powers; and to furnish those who are engaged-in transactions any way similar, with models by which they may profit, and from which they may form found principles of condut, derived from experience, and confirmed by exam- ples of the highest authority."
"The event which makes the principal objeEt of this Hifiory, has been sometimes confidered as a point of reparation between two periods, which have been accordingly treated apart-the period of the republic, and that of the monarchy. During a considerable part of the firfi period, the Romans were highly diftinguiffed by their genius, magnani- mity, and national spirit, and made suitable attain- ments in what are the ordinary objeas of pursuit- wealth and dominion. In the second period they continued for some time to profit by the attainments which were made in the former, and while they walked in the trad of the commonwealth, or prac- tifed the arts and retained the lessons which former ages had taught, fiill kept their poffeflions. But after the springs of political life, which were wound up in the republic, had some time ceased to aft; when the fiate was become the concern of a tingle person, and the vestige of former movements were effaced, the national charater declined, and the power of a-great empire became unable to preserve what a small republic had acquired. The example, whether to be shunned or imitated; is certainly ftructive in either period ; but most so in the tran- fition that was made from one to the other; and in the forfeiture of those public advantages, of which'"
"- Ithe"
"the Roman people, in some part of their courfe A  availed themselves with so much diftinaion, and 1, which, in the sequel, they abused with so much order at home, and oppreflion of their fubjets abroad."
"With this objet before me, I hatten to enter on the scenes in which it begins to appear; and shall not dwell upon the history of the first ages of Rome; nor flop to collect particulars relating to the origin and progress of the commonwealth, lon- ger than is necessary to aid the reader in recolleat- the circumstances which formed the conjunc- ture in which this intereiting change began to take place."
"For this purpose, indeed, a general description of the slate and its territory, such as they were in the beginning of this tranfafion, might have been sufficient; but as it is difficult to fix the precise point at which causes begin to operate, or at which effets are complete, I have indulged myself in looking back to the origin of this famous republic, whether real or fabulous, and shall leave the reader to deter- mine, at what time he will suppose the period of authentic history to begin, or at what time he will suppose the causes of this revolution to operate, and to produce their effets."
"As it is impoflible to give, in mere description, a fatisfacory account of a subjec which is in its na- ture progressive and fluctuating, or to explain poli- tical eflablifhments without some reference to the occasions from whence they arose, I have, upon there accounts, endeavoured to give, even to the first part of my labours, the form of.narration; and, together with the progress of political inftitu- tions in the ltate, remarked its territorial acquisitions and conquefis, in the order in which they were made. In proportion as the principal object of the history presents itself, I (hall wish, as far as my ta- Jents and the materials before me allow, to fill up"
"the"
"B o the narration, and give to even, scene of the tranf-"
". action its complete detail. When this is done, and 'the catastrophe is passed, I shall wish again to tract my narration; and as I open with a summary account of what preceded my period, close with a similar view of its tequel.
The Romans are laid to have made their fettle- ment in the end of the sixth, or beginning of the seventh Olympiad , about two hundred years before the accession of Cyrus to the throne of Per- fia, seven hundred years before the Christian tEra, and long before the date of any authentic profane fiitory whatever. The detail of their' tory is mi- nute and circumfiantial; but on this account is the more to be fufpeted of fidtion: And in many parts, besides that of the fable, with which it is feffedly mixed, may, without any blameable fcep- ticism, be rejeced as the conjeture of ingenious men, or the embellishments of a mere tradition, which partakes in the uncertainty of all other fane history of the fame times, and labours under the obscurity which hangs over the origin of all other nations .
That the Roman slate was originally a small one, and came by degrees to its greatness, cannot be doubted. So much we may safely admit on the faith of tradition, or in this instance, infer, from the continuation and recent marks of a progress which the people were still making, after they became an object of observation to other nations  , and after they began to keep records of their own: That they had been an assemblage of herdsmen and warriors, ignorant of letters, of money, and of commercial arts, enured to depredation and violence, and sub-' sifting chiefly by the produce of their herds, and the fpcils of their enemies, may be safely admitted; because we find them, in the most authentic parts of   Dionyf. HaL . i.      (A) Dionvr. Hal.  i.
their
their hiflory, supplying these defets, and comingc A  forward in the fame direction, and consequently si_ .proceeding from the fame origin, with other rude nations; being, in reality, a horde of ignorant bar- barians, though likely to become an accomplifhled nation.
-In the firlt accounts of their fettlemert, it is said that they mustered three thousand men on foot and three hundred on horseback (i). Their eltablifh- rent being effeced by surprise or by force, and their people conffting of armed men who had every acquisition to make at the expence of their neighbours, they were naturally in a state of war with the country around them. They took post on the Palatium, a small height on the Tiber, which, according to former traditions, had been previously occupied by five different races of men, who, in a -country so precariously fettled, were frequently changing their places  . Their city was the sirs model of a Roman camp, fortified with a square breast-work and ditch, to serve as an occasional treat to themselves and their cattle. Their leader, .or chief, was the sole magifrate or officer, either civil or military. The members of the common- wealth were diftinguifhedinto different classes or ranks, under the names of Patrician and Plebeian, Patron and Client.  The Patron, fays Diony- *flus,  was to protea, to give counsel,; and,  whether present or absent, was to his clients  what the father is to his family. The Clients, in  return, were to contribute to the support of their  Ptron, to aid him in placing his children in mar-  riage; and, in the cafe of his being taken by ' an enemy, were to pay his ransom or of his - being condemned in a fine, were to discharge it ' for him (1), ,A)   i.  4. (A) Dionyf. Hal.  i (I)     "
"TIhe"
"B The limits of prerogative and privilege, as in"
"other rude societies, were vet imperfectly marked. It was the prerogative of the king to lead in war, and to rule in peace; but it is probable that he no more wished to deliberate, than to fight alone; and, though he may have done either occasionally, yet numbers of his followers were ever ready to attend him in both. The people acknowledged him as their leader, or prince; but they themselves, as in other instances of the fame kind, were accustomed, on remarkable occasions, to assemble; and, without any concerted form of democracy, became the so- vereign power, as often as their passions engaged them to at in a body. The superior class of the people as naturally came to have their meetings apart, and may have assembled frequently, when the occasion was not fufficierit to require the atten- of the whole  . Hence probably the ella- blifhments of the senate and of the popular assem- blies, which were called the Comintia, and were both of so early a date as to be ascribed to the first of their kings (;)."
"Even this founder of the fiate, we are told, was difiinguifhed by his ushers or limtors carrying before him the axe and the rods, as the emblems of his power, and the infiruments of his justice. The names of the senators were entered in a lift, and they were separately called to their meetings. As- femblies of the People were intimated by the found of a horn. The citizens were difiinguifhed into CuriaE, Centuries, and Tribes; divisions under which they formed their several compartments, for military array, religious ceremonies, or political deliberations. When met to decide on any public queition, each division apart colleced the votes of its members, from thence formed a vote for the   ninuonbs rebus PrincipCs, mnjoribus omues confaltant. Ta. :: Moribus GCrm. (.) Dionyf.  "
"*Curia"
"Curia or Century; and, by the majority of thefe A  determined the whole. The Curiae were fraterni- 1 ties, or divisions of the people, which met for the performance of religious rites: each had its separate priest, and place of assembly. When the Curia were called on matters of slate, they retained part of their religious forms; opened their meeting with observing the auspices, or signs of futurity; and if these were unfavourable, could not proceed on business. The Augurs, therefore, in'this mode of assembly, had a negative on the proceedings of the People."
"The Centuries were formed on a more artful idea, to make. power accompany wealth. The people were divided into classes, according to the rate of their fortunes : each class was divided into Centuries; but the number of Centuries in the ferent clailes was so unequal, that those of the first or richest class made a majority of 'the whole; and when the Centuries of this class were unanimous, they decided the question. By this institution, the rich were masters of the legislature, though not without some compensation to the poor, as the fe- veral claffes.were charged with taxes and public services, in the fame proportion in which they were vefied with power."
"The people, when thus assembled, were diftin- guified in their classes by their ensigns and arms, and, though called together on political affairs, were termed the army  ."
"In the firit ages of this principality or common- wealth, the meetings of the people were held first by Curiae, and afterwards by Centuries. The prac- tice of voting by Tribes was of a later date than either, and was ihe device of a popular party to ex- clude the auspices, to level the condition of ranks, and by there means to turn the channels of power"
"(0) Dionyf. Hal.    16,17, i8. .  i.  43."
"in"
"B 0 in their own favour. The people were formed into"
"* their Classes and Centuries, to elect their officers, to '' na ct laws, or to deliberate on other affairs of state;"
"but they did not without itruggle or contest always acquiesce in this mode of allembly. The poorer citizens often insisted to be called in the Curie, and afterwards in the Tribes, to decide on affairs which the rich would have referred to the Centuries alone. The question on there occasions went to the founda- of the confiitution, and implied a doubt whe- ther the state was to be governed by the balance of numbers, or the balance of property ."
"To these original springs of the political frame may be joined those of religion, which in all go- vernments must have a considerable force; and in this has always been supposed a principal power to regulate its movements. Here indeed, there being no difiinction of clergy and laity, the authority of the itatefman, augur, and priet, was united in the fame persons, or in the fame orders of men : and as, in the mind of every citizen, notwithstanding the high measure of his fiperfitiion, the sword of fate was preferred to the altar, the politician and ({) State of the Cliffes and Centuries at the establishment 9f the CenAus: Valuation."
"Clafr. Roman. Sterling. No. ofCent."
"1.   1oo,0oo 322 1S 98 2. 75,000 242 3 Pl 3. 50,000co i6 9 2 4- 25,000 So 14 1l 5. 1,ooo0 35 o0 31 6. - _ Total 193 From First Class - - - 9S Sub."
"95 Majority of the frtft Ci=fs 3 A property of loo,ooo ass or pounds of copper intitled the owner to Slace in the first Clafi, 75,cco to a place in the second, 5o,0oo to a place in the third, 25,00o to a place in the fourth, 1,000 to a place in the fifth, and the remainder of the people, having no valuation, or having less than tha: of the fifth Claf., were thrown into the sixth or lafl Class. The whole were divided into 193 Centuries, of which the first Class contained So Cen- turies of foot, and 18 of horlmenn, in all 9g ; being a majority of the whole. The sixth Class formcd no more than one Century, as appears from the in. section of the preceding table."
"warpor"
"warrior availed himself of the respect which wasc A  paid to the priest, and made fuperfitiion itself sub- servient to the purposes of slate. With presages and prodigies he encouraged or refrained the peo- ple in their desires and pursuits; he bound them with vows and with oaths, to a degree that has not been equalled by mankind in any other initance and, with reference to this circumstance in particu- lar, it has been observed, that the feeds of Roman greatness were laid in the implicit respeCt with which every citizen revered the first inffitutions of his country (q)."
"The wants by which the Romans were impelled in the first slate of their settlement, made it necef- fary for them to vanquish some of their neighbours, or to perish in the attempt. Valour, accordingly, in their estimation, was the principal quality of hu- man nature, and the defeat of an enemy the chief of its fruits. Every leader who obtained a vicory made his entry at Rome in proceflion; and this gave rife to the triumph, which continued, from the first to the last age of the commonwealth, to be the highest object of ambition."
"Hiflorians, admiring the effect of this and of other practices of an early date among the Ro- mans, have represented their founder, and his im- mediate fucceflbrs, as philosophers, statesmen, and able tutors, who, with a perfect foresight of the consequences, suggested the maxims which gave so happy a turn to the minds of men in this infant republic. They are laid to have taught, that by frugality and valour the Romans were to conquer the world: that they ought not to lay waste the lands which they conquered, but to possess them with colonies of their own people: that they ought not to flay the vanquished, but transport their cap- ives to Rome, as an accellion to the number of"
"(q) See Machiavel Dircourfcs on Lisy."
"thelt"
"a o their own citizens: that they ought not to make"
"L _ war without provocation, nor to commence hoffili-"
"ties until they had demanded and had been refused reparation of wrongs. In whatever degree we sup- pose these maxims to have been expressed or under- flood in the councils of Rome, it is certain that the successful condut of the state in there particulars was sufficient to have fuggefled the idea that they were known."
"To the other fortunate customs which may be traced up to those early times of the fiate, we may join that of the Census, by which the people, at every period of five years, took a regular account of the numbers and efiates of their citizens, as the best measure they could have of their own progress or decline, and the furefi test of their policy and conduct as a nation."
"The Romans reckoned in the firfi period of their history a fucceflion of seven kings  , to each of whom they ascribed the invention of their several inflitutions. To Romulus, the mixed form of their government, the establishment of the senate and assemblies of the people, the ranks of Patri- cian and Plebeian, the relations of patron and cli- ent. To Numa, the religion of the people, and their regard to oaths. To Servius Tullius, the Census, or periodical muster; and so on. But whether we suppose these inflitutions to have been the suggestion of particular occasions, or the inven- of ingenious men, dire by a deep preme- ditation of all their effects, there is no doubt that such inltitutions existed in very early times, and served as the foundation of that policy which tinguifhed the Roman state."
"The monarchy of Rome is said to have lafied two hundred and forty-four years, a period in   RomrninU , Nnam, Tu:lls Hofiliu', Ancus Martius, Tarquinius Prif- -: , nsius Tulliu;, .ui:nias Suptrbus."
"which"
"which the numbers of the people, and the extent ofc A , their settlement, had greatly increased. During ' this period, they had drawn many of their neigh- - bours to Rome, and sent many of their own people to occupy settlements abroad. By the inrolment of aliens, they procured a certain increase of people; and by spreading their colonies around, they made acquisitions of territory, and extended the nursery of Roman citizens. We find, nevertheless, that, by -the last part of this policy, they incurred a danger of losing the people whom they thus established or bred up in new settlements, however little removed from the metropolis. Men had not yet learned to confider themselves as the citizens of orie place, and inhabitants of another. In departing from Rome, the Colonifis ceased to be inrolled in any tribe or ward of that city, or of its diftriEt; or to be ranked in any class of the people. ' They ceased, of course, to be called upon to vote in any of the assemblies, which they no longer.attended. They formed no- tions of an interest separate from that of their origi- nal country, so much, that the colonies which had been planted by one prince, refitted the power of his successors; and conqueils, where the Roman citizens were mixed with the natives, in order to keep them in fubjeEion, were sometimes in danger of being loft. The colony itself took a part in the discontents of the people they were sent to restrain, and became parties with the vanquished in their quarrel with the vitors  . But, notwithstanding frequent infiances of this fort among the Roman colonies, the memory of their descent and the ties of consanguinity, the pride of their diftintion as Romans, the capacity which every colonist retained of returning to Rome, and of being reinflated in the rolls of the people, for the most part preserved their attachment to Rome, and made them still a part of her strength, and a principal source of her greatness."
"    iii.  4,"
"During"
"o During this period of the kingly government,"
" the numbers that were inrolled in the city and its '-'territory increased from three thousand and two"
"hundred to eighty thousand men of an age fit to carry arms (). The number of Roman tribes or wards of the city was augmented from three to twenty-one. The kingdom itself extended over the greater part of Latium, and had an intimate al- liance with the whole of it. The city of Rome was become the principal resort of all the Latin confe- derates, the place of their meetings for devotion or pleasure, and the feat of their political confulta- tions  ."
"To accommodate and secure this populous and growing community, several of the heights conti- guous to their original settlement were, during the fame period, fucceflively occupied, the marfles tween them were drained by excavations and works of great magnificence, of which a-confiderable part is fill entire. The city itself, .instead of an earthen rampart, was surrounded with towers and battle- ments of hewn fione (.)."
"So (!) Lr. ib. i. 44.   Dionyf. Hal.    So0.   The ito-es employed in building the walls of Rome were laid each to ha*'- been fcrtcient to load a cart. Te common fev ers were executed at a great expence. It was proposed that they fnould bz of futicient dimcnfions to admit a waggon loaded with (Pi'.  -xavi.  15.). When there common Icwers came to be ob- ruEted, or out of repair, under the republic, the Censors contraced to pay athoucand talents, or about 193,oc 1. for clearing and repairing them (Dionyr. Ha!.  iii.  67.). They were again inedifrepair at the acceflion of Aueu0usCafar, and the reinflating them is mentioned among the great wo:ks ofAzrippa. He i said to have turned the course of leven rivers into thf- fiabtcrr.anous paftzges, to have made them navigable, and to have anucliy palTed in barges under the fireets and buildings of Rome. These so:ks are liill icyppofd to remain ; but, as they exceed the power and fer:ces of the refnt city to krelp them in repair, they are quite concealed, except one or placer. They were, in the midst of the Roman great- unzf, and tlil-are, reckoned amnong the wonders of the orld    i.  3) ; and yet they are said to have been works of the cider Tarquin, a po:-= whose territory did net extend, in any direction, above sixteen miles; an-, on this fappofition, they must have been made to accommodate acity a was calcul;ted chiefly for the reception of cattle, herdfnren, and ban* i. Rude nations femetimes execute woiks of great magnificence, as fortrcftes and temples, for the purposes of war and superstition; but fel- doar palacs, and till more fe!ldo works of mere convenience and clean."
"linsfs,"
"So far it appears, that while every fuccefivec A  prince gratified his own ambition by subduing some . neighbouring difiria or village, and brought an ac- chane ceflion of riches or territory to his country, the ge- republic. nius of monarchy was favourable to the growth of this rising empire. But when princes became sati- ated with conquests abroad, or began to meditate schemes to increase their own importance at home, their ambition took a different direAion, and led them to aim at making the kingdom hereditary, and the people more subservient to their pleasure. Under this direction of the monarch ambition, the slate, as Montesquieu observes, was likely to come stationary, or even to decline. A revolution became necessary, in order to preserve it in its for- mer progressive state."
"Such a revolution, we are told, took its rife from   z44 the resentments of the people, excited by abuses of power, and was haflened by a momentary indigna-  roused by an insult offered by a son of the king to a Roman matron. As the political evils which. this revolution was intended to remedy were, theftate of degradation and weakness to which the Sc- nate had been reduced, the usurpation of hereditary ficceffion to the crown, and the general abuses of go- vernmentt, suitable remedies were fought for to these evils, by restoring the numbers and power of the liness, in which, for the most part, they are long defecive. It is not nnreafonable, therefore, to question the authority of tradition in refpa& to this singular monument of antiquity, which so greatly exceeds what the beR accommodated city of modern Europe could undertake for its own conveniency. And as thole works are till entire, and may tontinue Ib for thousands of years, it may be suspected that they were even prior to the fettlcment of Romulus, and may have been the remains of a more an- cient city, on the ruins of which the fellowers of Romulus fettled, as the Arabs novw hut or encamp on the ruins of Palmyra and Balbeck. Livy owvn%, that the common fewers were not accommodated to the plan of Rome, as it was laid out in his time; they were carried in direcions across the greets, and palred under buildings of the greatest antiquity. This  rangement indeed he imputes to the hasty rebuilding of the city after its  llruaion by the GauL ; but haste, it is probable, would have determined the people to build on their old foundations, or at lealt not to change them so much as to cross the direrion of former Ctrects."
"Senate,"
"B O Senate, by abolishing the royalty, and by sub-"
"fiituting in its place an elecive and temporary ma- gifracy."
"The principal part of the revolution confifled in fubflituting the Consuls, two annual magifirates, in place of the King. These officers were chosen in the assembly of the Centuries. The officer who was to preside at the election erected his standard, and pitched his tent in the field of Mars , a meadow which lay on the banks of the Tiber, above the city. The people repaired to him in arms, and, difiinguifled by the ensigns and armour of their different classes, proceeded to make their eletion."
"That the city might not be surprised while its defenders were thus abroad in the fields, a guard was poted, with its colours displayed, on the Jani- culum, a hill on the right of the Tiber, which over- looked the river and contiguous plains. If an enemy appeared during the election, the guard had orders to firike their ensign; and on this signal every Century repaired to its post of alarni, and quellions of slate were suspended until the danger was removed. As it became an article of fuperfii-  that the Centuries could not proceed in any business without having an ensign displayed on the Janiculum, it was in the power of any person, by iiriking the ensign, to break up an assembly of the people: and this expedient for flopping the grefs of any business was accordingly made use of at different times to the end of the republic  ."
"It was meant that the Consuls should succeed to all the powers of the King; and in order to enforce their authority, a penalty of five oxen and two sheep was denounced against every person who fused to obey them (a). Their joint and divided   Campns Martius.   Sre Book II1.  III. (a) Plntarch. in . Po!ecalz."
"command,"
"command, with the limited term of one year; whichl - was to be the duration of their power, were thought -., sufficient securities against the abuse of it."
"The government, by this revolution, devolved on the senate and nobles. The Plebeians, in the firit formation of it, were favoured-by-theadmiffiori of a certain number of their order to fill  the fe- nates, hich had been. reduced in its numbers .by the tyranny of the late king- and they Cwereede- clared,. in cafe of any opprellion, to have a rightfof appeal fromi any- entence or command of -.the. ma- giftrate' to an affernbly. of -the ,people -.at .large; This was understood- to be the great charter of every citizen.. But the Patricians alone could be chofert into the.newly'eftablifhed qffices 'of itate. They. alone were to furnish the ordinary fucceffon :of members to the senate, and, by their inrolment in thefirft and second classes,, to- have a decided:ma- .. jority. in all the meetings or' cbmitia of..the Cen- turieS ()); that is, in all arfemblies. of the people that were called to .eleat.offieers of tate, to : laws, or to. judge of'appeals.. By there fevaral: provisions in their, favour -they-were in poffelion of a complietecaritocracy, which they claimed as. heee- ditary :: their families, but which they were not. likely td retain, without much discontent and Oni=, mofity on the part of their: fibjetS ."
"(Ai Pionyr. Hal.   Vot. I. eHAP4"
"CHAP.  Form of the Republic.-Dffention of Parties.-Firf"
"Dicator.-Secelffon of Plebeias.--Tribunes of the Peopk -Their Objets.-Diftribution of Corn.- Division of Lands.-Preteifions of the Plebeians.- Cmnimffion to compile Laws.-Decetmvirs.-Twelve ables.-Intermarriage of Ranks.-Claimn of the Plebeians to the Confullate.-Military or Consular Tribunes.-Cenfors.-zEdies.-Prefetlus Annone. Fortune of the Republic.-Redutlion of Yeie- Dejfrucion of Rome by the Gauls-Rebuildingof the City. A  government of Rome, as it is represent-"
"j . after the expulsion of the king, was   44. come entirely ariftocratical. The nobles had the"
"exclusive poffeflion of office, without any third party to hold the balance between themselves and the people. The Consuls were the sole executive ma- giftrates, and the only ministers of the senate ; they: were understood to come in place of the king; per-, formed all the fnmtions of royalty; and, in thei manner of the kings, to whom they succeeded; united in their own persons all the dignities of the fate, those of 7Jdge, Magifrate, and Military Leader."
"Such, at the first institution of the common- wealth, was, both in refpec of government and manners, the simplicity or rudeness of this commu- nity. The People, however, in their new situation, were gradually and speedily led, by the accumula- of their affairs, by the contest of their parties and by the wants of the public, to a variety of establishments, in which they separated the depart- ments of state, more equally distributed its powers,"
"filled"
"illed up the lifts of office, arid put themselves in aC A  poflure to wield with advantage their strength as it _ encreafed, and to avail themselves of everry circim- fiance that occurred in their favour..
While the exiled king was endeavouiridn , by continual invasions, to recover his power, disputed arose between the parties who had joined to expel him (a) i creditors, supported by the ariftdciidy, of which the nobles were now in full pofeflloi, came severe in the exa(ion of debts, or the paifons laid claim to more than the clients were wllling to pay  . The slate was diftrasted at 6nce by its enemies from abroad, and by the differitidn of par- ties at home. The authority of the new govern- ment not being sufficient to contend with these (a) In these original disputes between'the Patricians and Plebeians at Rome, it is implied that they frequently or commonly flood in the relation of creditor and debtor, as well as of patron and client. And we may ac- count for this circumstance in either of two ways: First, by supposing that the client was in rome degree, tributary to his patron, as the valfal was tri- butary to his lord in the original slate of modern nations. Dionysius of Halycarnaffus has laid some foundation for this supposition, in the passage above cited, Or we may suppose, in the second place, that the debts in qoeftion were money or eTffes aEtually borrowed by the client and lent by the patron. The firIt supposition is most agreeable to the manners of modern times; but the lafR is more likely to have been the fact in the original (late of the Romans, and of ancient republics in general. Among them the greac diflintion of persons was that between freemen and slaves. The rich freeman was supplied with every thing he wanted by the labour ofhis slaves. The necessitous freeman toiled with his own hands in labouring a frtall piece of ground, or in tending a few beasts. He had do trade by which to'fupply the luuries of the rich, or by which, as in modern times, to make them his debtors. When he wanted their aid he was obliged to borrow; add there was, perhaps, but one occasion on which he had credit for this purpor ; when he was going to war, and when he both had a reasonable excuse for borrowing, and a probable profpe& of being able to pay, perhaps with terefI, from the spoils of an enemy. But when his hopes failed, he might become insolvent, and exposed to all the severities of which we read such complaints in the early part of the Roman Hiloi  There it, throughout this History, fufflcient evidence that the popular party were on the of the debtor. The prejudices of this partyoperated against the exaAion of debts. Their influence was employed in reducing the interelt of money ; in having it abolilied, and in having it detefled, un- der the invidious appellation of usury. They even strove, on occasion, to abolish debts: The result was far from being favourable to the necessitous borrower; he was obliged to pay for the rilk, the penalties, and the obloquy to which the lender was exposed in tranfgrefling the laws.
  Dionyf. Hal.  5.  ficultiesd OO ficulties, the senate resolved to place themselves
and the commonwealth, for a limited time, under uc. -. the power of a single person, who, with the title o455*- of Dictator, or Maiter of the People  , should
at his pleasure dispose of the fiate, and of all its sources.
This officer was invested with power to punish the disorderly without trial and without appeal to arm the people, and to employ their forces on any service; to name his own lubftitute, or second in command; and to aa without being, even at the expiration of his office, accountable either to the senate or to the people. The circumstances that were probably accidental in the first nomination of this extraordinary officer, were afterwards repeated as unalterable forms in every successive appoint- ment of the fame kind. It became the prerogative of the senate to resolve that a Ditator should be named, and of the Consul to name him. The ce- remony was performed in the dead of night;   and as soon as the nomination was known, the Lic- tors, or ministers of justice, armed with their axes and rods, withdrew from the ordinary magifirate, to attend this temporary lord of the common- wealth.
This was the first political expedient to which the state was dirested by the exigency of its new government. The precedent came to be repeat- edly followed in times of calamity or public alarm, and the whole powers of the state were occasionally entrusted to single men, on the sole security of their personal characters, or on that of the short dura- of their trufi, which was limited to fix months. This intfitution was devised by the senate, to press the disorders which broke out among the peo-
Mi) Magifter Popuni.       2o. &  ix.  a8. The date of the nomination of the first Diaator is uncertain*  Sib.  Sinme place it nine years after the expulfon of the King,; Dionyf. 1i yaer'.
pie,
pie, and to unite the forces of the commonwealthc A  againfi its enemies. The next-was of a different _ nature, and was meant to prote the Plebeians against the oppreliion of their lords."
"The inferior afs of the people, almost excluded from any share in the new government, soon found that under its influence they had more oppression to fear from their Patrons, than they had ever ex- perienced from the prince they had baniihed. So long as the king and the senate shared in the pow- ers of the state, the one took part with the people, when the other attempted to oppress them ; and it was the ordinary interest and policy of the prince to weaken the nobles, by supporting the Plebeians against them. This effect of the monarchy still, in some measure, remained, so long as the exiled king was alive, maintained his pretensions, and made the united services of the people neceflary to the senate. During this period the Patricians were still on their guard, and were cautious not to offend the people; but upon the death of the king, and the security which the new government derived from this event, the nobles availed themselves of their power, and enforced their claims on the people with extreme severity. In the capacity.of creditors, they imprisoned, whipped, and enslaved those who were indebted to them, and held the liberties and the lives of their fellow-citizens at their mercy. The whole body of Plebeians was alarmed; they saw more formidable enemies in the persons of their own nobility, than in the armies of any nation. whatever. When the republic was attacked, they accordingly refused to arm in its defence. Many who had already suffered under the rod of their cre- ditors, when called upon to enlist, shewed their limbs galled with fetters, or torn with the firipes which they had received by command of their mer- Giless patrons,"
"TIhefe"
"Bo These diftrations, joined to the acual presence"
"of a foreign enemy, obliged the senate to have course to their former expedient, and to entrust the republic again in the hands of a Didator. Having succeeded in their firfi nomination, and having driven the enemy from their territories, they curred to the fame expedient again, on the return of a like occasion; but, in order to mix insinuation with the terrors of this measure, they made choice of Valerius, a person whose name was already known to the sufferers by some popular laws which they owed to his family. This officer had credit enough with the people to prevail on them to take arms, and had the good fortune to repel the enemy, by whom the fiate was invaded: But, upon his turn, not being able to prevail on the senate to ful- fil the hopes which he had given to the people, he made a speech to exculpate himself, and laid down his power. The citizens who had fought under his banner being still in the field, and, without any orders to disband, suspecting that the senate, under pretence of some war on the frontier, meant to move them from the city, ran to their arms; and, if they had not been restrained by their military oath, and the refpe they paid to the government of their country, must have entered the gates by force. But, under the imprefflon of these motives, they fled from the walls, instead of invading them, retired beyond the Anio, and took pofleflion of a height about three miles from Rome  , after- wards known by the name of the Sacred Hill. Their officers followed, and endeavoured to per- fuade them to return to their duty; but were told, that no duty was owing to a government which had withdrawn its protecion, and encouraged oppression; that free citizens own no country in which they are not permitted to enjoy their free-"
"  Cicero dc Claris Oratoribus,  14."
"dom."
"dom.  To what purpose, said Sicinius Bellutus A  who was then at the head of this mutiny,  recal __
us to a city from which you have already forced  us to fly by your extortion ? By what new as- ' furance can you persuade us to rely on a faith  which you have repeatedly broken? By what charm can you engage us in support of a corn-  monwealth, of which you will not allow us to be members ? You mean to engross all the fruits  which are to be reaped in your country, and it is  well. We shall leave you to do so, and do not  mean to interrupt your enjoyments..."
"This secession of a great body of the people hav- continued for several months, and in'this:time received a constant acceflion of numbers from the city and from the contiguous fields, threw. the public into the greatest disorder; exposed its lands to be negleted or pillaged by its own inhabitants, and ravaged by numerous enemies, who took this opportunity to invade it without opposition."
"The Patricians had sufficient force in their own body, and in that of their faithful retainers, to guard the avenues of the city, and to secure it from surprise: But being reduced to great difficul- ties for want of their usual supplies of provisions, and apprehending fiill greater from the interrup- of labour and the suspension of government, they came to a resolution to negotiate with the leaders of the mutiny; and, for this purpose, raised Sp. Caflius, a person who, though of a patrician family, was in high favour with the people, to the office of Consul. They agreed to mitigate the fe- verities which they had hitherto praCtised against solvent debtors, and to release such of them as were atually in bonds, or had been destined to slavery."
"With there conceflions, a deputation was sent to. the camp, and a negotiation was opened, in which the Plebeians obtained, not only a full acknow- ledgment of their privileges, but, what was of"
"more"
"B o more consequence, a power of forming assemblies"
"_ apart from the nobles  , and of electing annual"
"magistrates to guard and watch over their own fe- parate rights.  Your Consuls, they said,  are  not so much the officers of the commonwealth as  the heads of a faction; and, in all quefiions that ' relate to the people, are parties rather than  judges. It is reasonable that we too have a head  or representation in the commonwealth, under  which we may act, at least, in our own   fence.  6o. In return to this well-advifed and specious requi-"
"ition, the trihunitian power was eflablifhed, and with it the foundations of some good, and of much harm, laid in the commonwealth. Great part of the last might have been prevented, if the Ple- beians, now in poiReflion of a right to nominate Tribunes for the care of their interests, had from thenceforward been content with the power of elec- merely, had discontinued their own collecive afiemblies for any other purpose, and encreafed the number of their Tribunes to a just representative of their whole body. 'The return, however, was more agreeable to the spirit of the times. The people were allowed to afiemble ; and, instead of-a repre- fentation to support and preserve their rights with steadiness and with moderation, they proceeded to elect a few leaders, who, from thenceforward, were to head every popular tumult, and to raise up every wind of contention into a florm."
"The Tribunes were authorised, at their firfi infli- tution, to forbid, or to restrain, any measures which they thought hazardous, or injurious to the rights of their confituents, but not to propose any law, nor to move any positive resolution. They were not entitled to exercise' their powers beyond tss walls of the city, or'to absent themselves from"
"-() Dionyf. Hal.  "
"* :;~~~~~~\"
"it for a whole day, except in their attendance on A  the fefiival of the Latin allies, where the presence of all the Roman magistrates was required. A fin- gle Tribune might stop the proceedings of his own body, and of the people themselves, as well as the proceedings of the senate and patrician magistrates. In the exercise of this last part of their trust, though not permitted in this age of aristocracy to mix with the senators, they had places afligned them at the doors of the senate house, from.which, as from a watch-tower, they were to observe, and on occa- sion to flop, the proceedings of the lords."
"As the Tribunes were destined to withfland the exertions of power, and were supposed, on the moll dangerous occasions, to expose themselves to the axe and the sword of their adversaries, it was thought necessary to guard their persons with the most sacred fences of religion and law. For this purpose an inviolable rule was prescribed in the fol- lowing terms:  Let no one offer violence to the person of a Tribune; neither kill him, nor  cure him to be killed; neither firike him, nor  procure him to be struck. Let the person who  offends against this law be accursed; let his es-  sets be made sacred to pious uses, and let every one pursue him to death."
"To render this at irrevocable, a solemn oath for the perpetual observance of it was imposed, and dreadful imprecations were denounced againit any person who should propose to repeal it   and such was the effect of there precautions, taken for the safety of the Tribunes, that, under the public, persons obnoxious to public justice could not be punished, while they continued to bear this sacred charater. And the Emperors themselves, after they had abolished all the other rites of the blic, found, under this sacred title of Tribune,"
"  Dionyf. Halicar.    410."
"a refuge"
"B o a refuge to their crimes and oppreflions, and a ,_. proteEtion against the designs of assassins, or the"
"resentment of those they had offended by their ty- ranny."
"The College of Tribunes, at its intfitution, was not limited to any precise number of members; it consisted at first of such persons as had been molt active in procuring the establishment, and conti- nued to be filled with the most zealous partisans of the people, the number being three or more, ac- cording as persons appeared to merit this honour. But in process of time both the Plebeians who as- pired to this diflinEtion, and the Patricians who were jealous of it, conspired to augment the num- bers.-The first, in order to make way for their own preferment; and the second, to the end that they might be the better enabled, on occasion, to disunite their enemies, and to procure the negative of a part, to arrest the proceedings of the whole. The College of Tribunes was accordingly aug- mented by degrees to ten; and a law was made to provide that the eleaions should not flop short of this number  ."
"Patricians could neither elea nor be elected into this office (i), although in the midli of irregularities incident to all unformed, especially to all popular governments, some exceptions are mentioned, even to the last part of this rule. The Tribunes were at firit eleced in the assembly of the Curia, where the vote of the poorest citizen was equal to that of the most wealthy. But even here the Patricians, al- though not absolute masters, as they were in the as- fembly of the Centuries, having great influence, and, by holding the auspices, having even a nega- tive on all proceedings, it was thought necessary to alter the form of the assembly in which the Tri- bunes were elected to that of the Tribes; and by (;) Lex :bonia.   iii.  65. (;) Dioayf. Hal.  "
"this"
"this means to enable the people to make their elec- A   without any controul from the nobles, either _ in virtue of the authority of the senate, or the terpofition of the augurs  ."
"Such was the inflitution of the Plebeian Tri- bunes, while the fiate yet knew of no other magi- sirate besides the Consuls and the Quaetors, of whom the last, even under the kings, had been em- ployed as a species of commiffaries, or providers for the army. The expedient was adopted by the senate, to quiet the animosity of parties; but tend-  in fact, only to render the contest between them more equal, and to multiply the fubjecs of dispute. The Tribunes being velted with power to aflemble the people, could not long be confined to the mere negative with which they were at first entrufled; nor was it easy, on every occasion, to difiinguifh the measures of attack from those of  fence; and the party of the Plebeians, with there officers at their head, were then in a posture, not only to preserve their. rights, but likewise to gain to their order continual accefions of privilege and power. Happily for the slate, there was yet much ground of this fort to be gained, without transgress- the bounds of good order, or encroaching on the authority of equitable government."
"The popular leaders in this career had to break through the bar of hereditary diiintion, which, it was pretended, contrary to the genius of the public, that no personal merit and no measure of ability could remove. One of the first steps they made in pursuit of this object, was to preclude every other power in the slate from a negative on their own proceedings. For this purpose it was enated, by the authority of the Tribes, that no one, under pain of death, or of an arbitrary fine, floutd interrupt a Tribune while he was speaking"
"  Dionyf. Hal.  ix.  65."
"to"
"B o to the people (). Being thus provided againit i1, terruption, as they were by a former law againit"
"violence to their persons, they not only took up the complaints of their constituents, they suggested new claims to be made by them, and, at every fuccelfon to office, endeavoured to signalize their term by some additional eflablifhment for the nefit of the people: They even interrupted the itate in its councils and military operations, and al- most in every instance hung upon the wheels of government, until the grievances they complained of were redressed, or the demands they made were complied with."
"In order to encreafe the number of Plebeian of- ficers, whose aid the Tribunes alleged were necef-  -. fary to themselves, they, soon after their own initi-"
"tution, procured that of the _Ediles, who were to inspect the markets, and have charge of the pub- lic buildings and public shows. Being Subordinate to the Tribunes, as well as to the Consuls, they acted, upon occasion, in what related to the policy of the town, as assistants to both (ni)."
"As Rome was a place of arms, and fubfitled in some measure by public magazines; as settlements won from the enemy were often to be disposed of to citizens; as its inititutions were yet new and complete; and as the Patricians fiill claimed an ex- clufive right to all the offices of irate, there was much to occupy the cares of the Public-the difiri- bution of corn from the granaries, the division of conquered lands, the defects of the laws, and the arbitrary proceedings of the magistrates. The qua- lifications of candidates for the office of Consul fur- nified, during some ages, the subjet of continual debates, and frequently exposed the parties cerned in them, if they escaped the swords of their enemies, to perish by their own dissentions. Their"
"(I) Dionyf. Hal.      Hal.  "
"civitl"
"civil and military tranfalions were constantly A  blended together. The senate frequently involved - the state in war, in order to suspend its intestine di-'- visions, and the people as often took occasion, from the difficulties in which the community was involved by its enemies, to extort a compliance with their own demands."
"The first subject of contention that arose after the institution of the Tribunes was a fequei of the troubles which had preceded that establishment; The fecefion of the people took place in Autumn, the usual seed-time in Italy; and the labours of that season having been accordingly interrupted, the city was threatened with famine; and the senate exerted all its industry in guarding against this evil  . After the public granaries were filled for this purpose, it became a question, upon what terms, and at what price, the poorer citizensifhould be supplied from thence. Their insolence in the. late mutiny, and the part which they themselves, by furpending the labours of the field, had taken, in bringing on the distress with which they were now threatened, were fully flated against them in this deliberation. The opportunity was.thought to: be fair, to recal the several concessions which had been extorted from the senate, and, in particular, to oblige the people to part with their Tribunes, and to return within the former bounds of their duty."
"Such was the substance of a contumelious speech, delivered in the senate by the celebrated Caius Mar- cius Coriolanus. The younger nobility applauded his sentiments; but the greater part of the senate, having recently escaped from a popular storm, were unwilling to engage themselves anew in the fame dangerous situation. In order, therefore, to appease the people, who were greatly incensed at"
"..   Dionyf.  "
"- the"
"B oo Kthe proposal which had been made to subdue them,"
"L they agreed to deliver corn from the public grana-"
"ries, at a price below that of the most plentiful sea- son. And, by this proceeding, for the present pa- cified the Tribunes, but flattered their presumption, and encouraged them to meditate fiill further  mands. The distress with which their constituents had been threatened was prevented, but the insult they had received from Caius Marcius was not avenged; and they cited him to appear before the tribunal of the People, to answer for his conduE to the party he had offended. The Senate and Patri- cians were disposed to proteEt him; bit, trufling that by the majority of their votes they might be able to acquit him in the comitia of the Centuries, the- only assembly before which, from the time of its first institution, any capital charge had been hi- therto laid against a citizen, they suffered the trial to proceed. In this, however, they were difap- pointed. The Tribunes infifled, that the people should assemble in their Tribes; and having vailed in this previous question, the accused, as already condemned by this determination  lating to the form of his trial, withdrew from his sentence  ,   z6. Coriolanus, in resentment of this rofecutionz,"
"which forced him into exile, joined the enemies of his country, and by encreafing the alarm of war from abroad, helped to suspend for a while the ani- mofities of which he hirifelf had furnished the oc- cafion at home. The contest in which he had en-. gaged the parties ended with his own exile, and was not attended with any other political effects but it merits a place in there observations, as a- proof of the great influence which the Plebeian party, under its new leaders, had acquired, and as an evidence of the singular state of the Roman po-"
"(:) Dionyf. Hal.  i.  469. i. ' slicy"
"licy, by which, in the uncertain choice of differentc A  modes of assembly, the very form of the govern- ment was left undetermined, until the occasion oc- curred on which this government was to at."
"The assembly of the Centuries formed an arifto- cracy, that of. the tribes a democracy. They did not partake in the sovereignty by any determinate rule, but each of them occasionally seized upon the whole of it; and, inflead of balancing each other. by regular checks and interruptions, threatened to render the administration of the Republic a conti- nual. scene of contradictions and inconsistencies. Such at least is the judgment which we are tempted, in speculation, to pass on this singular conflitution, although, in the sequel of its hifiory .-it will appear. to possess, at least, one.of. the highest political  vantages, in, being the most excellent nursery of flatefmen. and warriors, and in forming the most conspicuous example of national 'ability and fuc- cess. . . :"
"The calm which the approach of Coriolanus, at the head of an army of Volsci, produced within the city,..was of no longer duration than the alarm which produced it. As soon as the external enemy withdrew, the parties within resumed their disputes; but on a subjea which was fill more important than that which had recently employed them; and Which, continuing to be moved at intervals, served to the laft.hour of the Republic as an objea of po- pularzeal, or furnilhed a specious pretence, which ambitious and designing men continually employ-  to captivate the ears of the populace. This was the. most popular of all propofitions--an equal di- vision of land propertyi known by the name of the Agrarian Law ."
"While the Romans were making their firfl. ac- quifitions of territory, their conquests were under- stood to be made for the people, and were accord- ingly divided among them, or given to, those who"
"had"
"B o had not a sufficient provision for the fubfifience of"
"L their families  . But of late, during a confidera-"
"ble period, while the Republic barely withitood the attacks of the exiled king, or recovered the losses sustained in the wars with the numerous enemies that supported him, she had either made few acqui- fitions of this fort, or, suitably to the growing parity of ranks, which, though not necessary in very small republics, becomes so in proportion as nations extend, suffered the conquered lands to pa by connivance, occupancy, or purchase, into the hands of powerful citizens, who made use of there opportunities to appropriate eflates to them- selves.   =67. The Tribunes had not yet begun to make their"
"complaints on this fubjeet, when they were antici- pated by the Consul Sp. Caflius, .who, being al- ready in high favour with the popular party, conti- nued to flatter the passions of the inferior class, and is said to have aimed at an improper and dangerous influence in the slate. He affeced great zeal for the rights of the people, and proportional indigna- againif their oppressors. He complained,-:in particular, of the improper use which had been cently made of the conquered lands, by suffering them to become the property of persons who were already too rich. Having himfelfmade some quests, he showed how the lands of the Republic ought to have been disposed. of, by making an equal division of his own acquisitions among. the more indigent citizens (q). He obtained an at of the people to appoint three commissioners to en- quire into the abuses which had been committed in the disposal of lands acquired from the enemy, and to confider of the proper corrections."
"The senate, and the Patricians in general, were greatly alarmed; most of them had possessions that"
"  Dionyf.-Hal.   (q)     41."
"feemned"
"'seemed to fall within the objec of this inquiry AP. The popular party alleged, that conquered lands _, being acquired by the joint labours, and at the common hazard, of all the people, should be equal- ly divided among them. The Patricians contend- that there levelling principles led to confusion and anarchy; that, in a ilate of which all the terri- tory was acually, and within a few centuries, ac, quired by contest, there maxims could not be ap- plied without the subversion of government, as well as of property."
"In this contest, Caflius appeared to have the  vantage of numbers on his  and if he had fined his views to the division of lands, under which he was said to disguise a more dangerous tention, the senate and nobles muff have at least devised considerable settlements for the people, in order to elude his demands. But while Cassius alarmed the rich with danger to their property, he at the fame time alarmed every citizen with danger to his personal consequence, by offering the free- dom of the city to every alien, who, at his ium- mons, crowded from all the cantons of Latium to vote in the assemblies of the Roman people. His colleague opposed this measure, and the city, for the present, was saved from the intrusion of firan- gers. The attempt, however, gave offence to the people, as well as to the senate and the unhappy author of it, in order to regain the favour of his party, proposed a resolution, not only to make a gratuitous distribution of corn, but even to refund what had been formerly paid by any citizen at the public granaries. This proposal too was interpreted to his prejudice, and raised a suspicion that he meant, with the aid of aliens and of indigent citi- zens, to usurp the government. On this fuppofi-  all parties in the state combined against him, and he was condemned to susser the punishment of treason."
"YOL., . This"
"B o This appears to have been the first projec after"
"the state began to have its demesne lands, and after private estates began to be accumulated, that was made to divide all territorial acquisitions in equal shares to the people. And though the author of it perifled in the attempt, the project itself was en- tailed on the commonwealth, as a subjet of diflen-  and became the source of repeated demands on the part of the people."
"The Tribunes had no sooner accomplished the ruin of Cassius, in which they concurred with the senate, than they infifed for the execution of the law he had framed, and for the nomination of three commiflioners already resolved on, for the division of conquered lands. They proteded the people in refuting to serve the slate in its wars, until this  mand should be granted. And having absolute and irrefifiible power to flop all proceedings in the city, they prevented all military levies within the walls, obliged the Consuls, during a certain period, to erect their ltandard in the country, and there to force the herdsman and labourer to enlist, by driv- away the cattle, and difiraining the effects of those who were unwilling to obey them  ."
"In these exertions of political strength, the par- ties at Rome learned by degrees to form their different plans, whether of adminifiration or of op- position."
"The senate endeavoured to furnish the people with employment abroad, to amuse them with tri- umphal processions, to gratify them with partial Settlements and allotments of land; and, in order to fop the violence of their leaders, by the nega- tive of some one of their own order, continually endeavoured to  .ide the College of Tribunes."
"The Tribunes, in their turn, endeavoured, by oaths and private engagements, to secure the una-"
"  Dionof. HZl.    No. 273 and No. S78."
"nimity"
"nimity of their own body, or to bind the minorityc A  to follow the decision of the greater number. They  taught the people to despise the partial settlements, which, to pacify or to suspend their importunities, were offered to them at a diflance from Rome. They taught them to aim at a higher object, the political consequence of their order, and an equal share in the government of their country. The Tribunes were honoured in proportion to the part which they took in support of this popular cause; and Plebeians were fucceflively raised to this office, in reward of the animosity they had occasionally shewn to the senate, and from refpet to the cou- rage with which they had, in any cafe, withstood the authority of the magistrate."
"At every fucceflion, accordingly, the new Tri- bunes endeavoured to signalize their year by fug- gesting some advantage to the people; and, in the course of their struggles, obtained many regulati- ons favourable to their interefi as an order in the State."
"One law which has been already mentioned, and which is of uncertain date, they obtained, to fubfti- tute the assembly of the Tribes for that of the Curiae in the election of Tribunes  ."
"Another, to exclude the Patricians entirely fromu.  tsa. the Assembly of the Tribes  .."
"The Agrarian Law itself they frequently moved, in the interval of other claims and pretensions, or brought it forward along with such claims, in order to alarm the Patricians, and to force them, under apprehension of this principal objec of their fears, to a compromise, or to a compliance in some other demand."
"To the other circumfiances, which tended fre- quently to revive these political flames, may be joined the arbitrary proceedings of the magistrate,   Dionyf. Hal.  9.     56.       60."
"D 2 and"
"B o and the defect of judicial forms in the common-"
"* wealth. The Consuls had succeeded to the Kings, * -' as sole Officers of State, both civil and military;"
"they had not sufficient forms or limitations prescribed to them in the exercise of their power  . This defect, which is common in the administration of rude governments, is for the most part supplied by degrees. Evils are corre6ted in proportion as they are felt, and the rational proceedings of one age are adopted as precedents to regulate the next. But, in the present inflance, at Rome, the popular party, it is said, demanded at once a system of jurifpru- dence and a complete body of laws. Being op- posed by the Patricians, they came to confider the measure as an object of party; and they pressed the acceptance of it, as much from animosity to the magifirates, as from a desire to secure public jus- tice, or to regulate the forms of judicial procedure: The Patricians confidered the project as an attack on their power; and, however innocent or reason- able it may have been, endeavoured to elude the execution of it with all the arts of evasion and  lay, which they had employed to prevent the divi- sion of the conquered lands, or to frustrate any other the most faEtious purpose of their adver- saries."
"In this contest the powers and artifices of both parties were fully exerted. To the great autho- rity and address of the nobles, the people opposed an ardour that was not to be cooled by delays, to be discouraged by partial defeats, or restrained by scruples in the choice of means for the attainment of their end. From this, as from many other frances, it may be inferred, that the popular party, in the contest with their superiors, are apt to think, that the rules of veracity and candour may be pensed with, and that the means of deceit and vio-"
"(  LiT.  iii.  9. Dionyf. Halycar.  "
"lenc!"
"lence may, without any feruple, be employed inc A  their own favour. With less honour and dignity to. . maintain than their adversaries, they are less afraid of imputations that detrat from either; and their leaders, supported by the voice of the more nume- rous party, are less apprehensive of evil fame. In this contest, accordingly, fititious plots and fpiracies were fabricated by the popular  and. fi&itious designs againfi the liberties of the people were imputed to the Patricians, in order to render them odious, and to deter them from appearing in support of their real pretensions  ."
"In the issue of these contefis, the senate, despair- of being able to divert the people from their purp6fe, agreed to the nomination of three missioners, who (hould be sent into Greece to make a colletion of such laws as, being found salutary in that country, might- be transferred to Rome. Soon after the return of the commiflioners, the Se- nate approved their report, and concurred in the nomination of the famous Decemvirs to compile a body of laws for the commonwealth."
"The Decemvirs were appointed merely to makeu.  302. the draft of a new code; and to propose matter for the consideration of the Senate and People, from whom alone the propositions could receive the au- thority of laws; yet the persons named for this pur- pose, as the History bears, had credit enough. with the people to be vested with a temporary fove- reignty, in which they superseded the authority of the Senate, as well as that of the Consuls, and had. unlimited power over the lives and fortunes of their fellow-citizens  . Before their commiflion ex- pired, -they presented a number of laws, engraven on ten tables or plates, and. containing a summary of the privileges to be enjoyed by the- eople, of the crimes to be punished by the Magistrate, and"
", '   Dionyf. Hal.   (,)  No. 303."
"of"
"B o of the forms to be observed in all judicial proceed-"
"L ings. They, at the fame time, informed the peo-  pie, that their plan was fiill incomplete, that many"
"useful additions were yet to be made; and, upon the faith of these declarations, obtained for another year the renewal of their powers, with a change of some of the persons who were named in the mifion."
"In this second year of the Decemvirs appoint- ment, two more tables or plates were added to the former ten; a circumilance from which this part of the Roman law has derived its name. This sup- plement, as well as the former body of laws, was received with great avidity, and the twelve tables continued to be respected at Rome, as the ancient titles, by which men are supposed to hold any va- luable rights, are revered in all nations  . No complete copy of them being transmitted to mo- dern times, we cannot fully judge of their value; but, from the fragments remaining in Authors that occasionally cite them  , this Code appears, in. some clauses, to have been a first draft of the regu- lations which are necelrary. in the efiablifhment of property, and in making private parties answerable to public judicatures in all their difputes.--The property of land was eitablifhed by a fair prefcrip-' of two years, and that of other effecs by a prescription of one year.--Any controversy cerning the boundaries of land-property was to be determined by arbiters or jurymen appointed by the Magiftrate.-Parties cited to a court of justice were not at liberty to decline attendance.---Judg- ment in capital cafes was competent only to the As- fembly of the People in their Centuries; but this fu- ,  Livy calls the Twelve Tabls rs cmnis publici privartiqu juris. Tucitcu cal: them Fieis euqi ris. And Crassus, in the Dialogue of Cic. Orat. is mrde to fay, Bblhothecas omhium philofophorum, nus mnihi rid-tur tzbalarum bellu fuperare. Orat.  i.  44. (=) Vie. Gravini Origine Juris Civilis. Pighii Anal,"
"preme"
"preme Tribunal might delegate its powers by a A  special commiflion. 1."
"In confidering this Code as a record of ancient manners, the following particulars are worthy of notice:"
"The dilinEtion of Patrician and Plebeian was so great, that persons of there different orders were not permitted to intermarry."
"The father being confidered as the absolute maf- ter of his child, had a right even to kill, or expose him to sale (a)."
"The interest of money was limited to one per cent.  ; but bankruptcy was treated as a crime,"
"and, (a) The clause in the Twelve Tables relating to the father power  sale, contains a Gngular limitation. Vendendi filium patri potellas elto. Si pater filium ter venundavit. fiiius a patre liber cito. The father may fell his child, but if he has fold him three times, the child (hall be free. (Dionyf.    27.  97.) This law, in its firllt appearance, carries an implication that, until this restriction was applied, fathers pracifcd felling their children times without limit. No law, it may be laid, is made 2gainft crimes altogether unknown; and, in general, what people do, may be inferred from what they are forbid to do; and yet the clause, lidcred in this light, is full of absurdity. The child, to be repeatedly fold, mult have repeatedly disengaged himfclf from fivery. After being twice fold, he mull have put himlelf a third time in the father power; and to render such cales the object of law in any age or country whatever, the great law of parental affeaion mull have been strangely lufpended. The auestion therefore may be submitted to Civilians and Antiquaries, whether it be not easier to suppose a miltake in the tradition or in the record, or an unnecessary precaution in the compilers of this Code, than such a fre- quency of the circsmltances presumed in this clause, as would make the olfence a proper object of legislation in any age or nation whatever, and whether this law may not have been, in its original intention, what it came in the fubfequcnt applications of it, a mere precaution in favour of the parent, that he should not be deprived of his child by furprize, and that unless he had fold him three times, he was not fuppolcd to have fold him at all. The form by which a Roman father emancipated his ofn, sifted of a sale three times repeated. The father fold him and received his price. The buyer once and again re-delivered the child, and had his  ice returned. After the third purchase, the buyer manumitted him by a fin- gular ceremony prescribed in the laws.   Nam primo duodiecim tabulis fancitum, ne quis unciario (. per mon. or I per cent. per ann.), focnore amplius exerecret, cum antOa Ox libidine locupletium agitaretur; dein rogatione tribunitia femuncias rc- daOa; poremo vetitz ufurme multifque plebifcitis obviam itum fraudi- bus, quae toties repreifa: miras per artcs rurlus oricbantur, Tacit. An.   Montesquieu ventures to rejct the authority ofTacitus in this inflance, and supposes that the law which he ascribes to the Decemvirs had no tx- jltence until the year   33g8 when, according to Livy,   it was"
"obtaincd"
"B o Kand, without any difiinction of fraud or misfor- .--. tune, exposed the insolvent debtor to the mercy of"
"his creditors, who might put him to death, diffief or quarter him, and difiribute his members among them  ."
"Mixed with laws that arose from fuperfiition, there were others containing proofs of great nati- onal wisdom. In private, every family were free to worship the gods in their own way. And in pub- lic, though certain forms were required, yet there was not any penalty annexed to the omiflion of them, as the punishment of offences in this matter was left to the offended god."
"The people were required to build their houses two feet asunder, to leave eight feet for the ordi- nary breadth of fireets and highways, and double this breadth at the turnings."
"They were forbid to dress or to polish the wood employed in funeral piles, or to exprefa their sorrow for the dead by wounding their flesh, tearing their hair, or by uttering indecent or lamentable cries."
"Such are a few of the more singular and charac- teriftical clauses which are mentioned among the obtained by the Tribunes  Doellius and  Meneniun, in favour of the people. Haud zquc patribu, Irta, infcquente anno  Mario & Co. Maniio CosT. cncirio fenore a  Duellio,  Menenio, tribunis ple- ti. rogatio perlata. It is indeed probable that many antiquated laws were referred to this Legendary Code of the Twelve Tables on no better au- thority than that of their mntiquity; And so gieat a reducion of intcr'ef was more likely to come from Tribunes actig in favour of the people, who were generally the dcbtors, and who soon after procured the entire  !ition of the interest of money, than from the DecemTirs, wvho, being of the ari;oratical faaion. look part with the creditors.   The clause in this Code respecting insolvent debtor,, is equally ftranse wih that which refpeafs the power of the father, 'and shews no let npon what atrocious ideas of what they were to permit, as wGell as of what they were to prohibit, the compilers of this Coae proceeded. Their ideas in either, it is obablr, were never realized. Livy fays, that debtors were txi & trrcdii crejirris      23 & 2q7.) But it is affirnmed with great obability of troth, that no creditor ever took the full benefit of this law avainIt his insolvent debtor (Aul. Gell.   . .). Laws that reflk from cnom, and are fnggefted by real occafibnd, 'are genuine proofs of the reigning manners; but laws enacted by special lawgivers, or comniilToners, only indicate what occurs to the fancy of the compiler, and i'ha are the prohibitions he is pleased to fuppofr may be necessary."
"'fragments"
"fragments of the Twelve Tables. The ardour ofc A  the people to obtain this Code, and the unlimited powers which they entrusted to the commissioners appointed to frame it, had nearly cost them their liberty; and thus ended the progress of their monwealth. The Two additional Tables, as well as the firit Ten, having been posted up for public infpectibn, and having been formally ena&ted by the Senate and People, the objec of the Decem- virs commission was obtained, and it was expected that they were to abdicate their power; but the principal persons vested with this trust, having cured it: with a view to usurp the government, or being debauched by two years uncontrouled domi- nion in the possession of it, refused to withdraw from their flation, and boldly ventured to persist in the exercise of their power after the time for which it was given had elapsed. At Rome, the power of the magiotrate was supposed to determine by his own resignation, and the republic might susser a peculiar inconveniency from the obstinacy of parti- cular persons, who continued to exercise the funai- ons of office after the period assigned them by law was expired."
"The Decemvirs took advantage of this defect in the confittution, continued the exercise of their power beyond the period for which it was given, took measures to prevent the restoration of the Se- hate and the Afiemblies of the People, or the elec- of ordinary magistrates, and, even without employing much artifice, got the People to.acqui- efce in their ururpation, as an evil which could not be remedied; and the usurpers, in thisas in other initances, seemed to meet withia: submission that was proportioned *tb the confidence with which they assumed their power. The wrongs of the State appeared to makle little. impieffiocn on parties who had an equal concern to prevent them; but a barbarous insult offered to a private family rekin-"
"dled"
"'s o Kdled or gave occasion to the breaking out of a flame,"
"which injuries of a more public nature only seemed to have Smothered."
"Appius Claudius, one of the usurpers, being cap- tivated with the beauty of Virginia, the child of an honourable family, and already betrothed to a per- son of her own condition, endeavoured to make himself mailer of her person, by depriving her al once of her parentage and of her liberty. For this purpose, under pretence that ihe had been born in servitude, and that she had been stolen away in hei infancy, he suborned a person to claim her as his slave. The Decemvir himself being judge in this iniquitous suit, gave judgment againfi the helplefr party, and ordered her to be removed to the house of the person by whom ihe was claimed. In thi, affecting scene, the father, under pretence of bid. ding a last farewel to his child, came forward tc embrace her; and, in the pretence of the multi, tude, having then no other means to preserve hei honour, he availed himself of the prerogative of Roman father, and itabbed her to the heart with knife. A general indignation instantly arose frorr this piteous fight, and all parties concurred, as a: the expulsion of the Tarquins, to deliver the repub.   34.lie from so hateful a tyranny  ."
"The Senate and Patrician adminiitration being re-eftablilhed by the chearful concurrence of  Plebeians, and the former government restored with the consent of all parties, a tide of mutua confidence ensiled, which led to the choice of the most popular persons into the office of Consul, anc procured a ready afient from the nobles to ever) measure which tended to gratify the people."
"The danger which had been recently experiencec from the exercise of uncommon discretionary pow. ers, produced a resolution to forbid, under the fe"
"  Lir.  iii.  37. Dionyf. Hal. sic."
"veref"
"vereft penalties of confiscation and death, any per- A  son ever to propose the granting of any such pow-  _ ers. The consecration of the persons of the Tri- bunes, which, under the late usurpation, had al- most loll its effet, was now renewed, and extend-  though in a meaner degree, to the Ediles and inferior officers, who were supposed to as un- der the Tribunes in preserving the rights of the people.
The Patricians likewise consented to have the a of the Senate formally recorded, placed in the temple of Ceres, and committed to the care of the Ediles  . This was in fa& a considerable dimi- nution of the power of the Consuls, who had been hitherto confidered as the keepers and interpreters of the Senate decrees, and who had often suppress- or carried into execution the ads of this body at pleasure.
But the most striking effect, ascribed to the pre   30A. sent unanimity of the citizens, was the ease with which the Plebeian assemblies were permitted to extend the authority of their ats to all the different orders of the commonwealth.
The Comitia, or assemblies of the Roman peo- ple, as may be colleced from the pait obfervati- ons, were now of three denominations; that of the Curiae, the Centuries, and the Tribes. In assem- blies of the first and second denomination, all citi- zens were supposed to be present; and laws were enated relating to the policy of the slate in gene- ral, as well as to particular departments, and fepa- rate bodies of men. The Centuries disposed of ci- vil offices, and the Curiae of military commands  . In the assembly of the Tribes, composed of Ple- beians alone, the Tribunes were eleted; and ats were passed to regulate the proceedings of their     iii.      51;  ix.  38. Cic. Famil.  i. ep. 9. LiT.    ,i.
own o own order, beyond which, in the ancient times o0
the republic, their authority did not extend. Bul ~1  as the Senate denied the right of the Tribes to enacl
laws that mhould bind the community, the Plebeians in their turn,edifputed the legislative authority the Senate. The Centuries alone were fuppofec to enjoy the right of enacting laws for the corn monwealth  .
This distribution, however, was partial, anc tended to lodge the sovereignty of the State in  hands of the Patricians, who, though no more thar a part of the people, were enabled, by their un doubted majority in the assemblies of the Cen turies as well as in the Senate, to,give law to the whole.
Equity and found policyrequired that the Pie- beians should have a voice in the. legislature of i commonwealth of which they made so confiderabl a part. This privilege appeared to be necessary, in order to secure them againit the partial influence ol a separate order of men. They accordingly ob- tained it; but in a manner that tended to disjoin, rather than to unite into one body, the collateral members of the State. Instead of. a deliberative voice, by which they might concur with the Senate and Coniitia of the Centuries, or. by which they might controul and amend their decrees, they ob- tained for themselves a separate and independent power of legislation, by which, as a counterpoise to the Patrician acs, which might pass in the Cen- turies without their concurrence, they could,, on their part, and without the presence or consent of the nobles, make Plebeian ats that could equally   sc4. bind the whole community  ;
This rude and artless manner of communicating a share of the legislature to the inferior order of the (i) These were ermed is; the resolutions of the Senate were term- ec Strr eL  and thlole of the  ibes, Pleloita.  Diunyf. Hal.  306. Li;.    55.
people,
people, tended greatly to increase the intricacy ofc A  this singular constitution, which now opened, in faCt, _ three diftin& sources of legislation, and produced laws of three different denominations; decrees of the Senate (i), which had a temporary authority; acts of the Centuries  ; and resolutions of the Tribes (1); and by these means undoubtedly made way for much intefrine division, diitraction, and tumult.
So far animosity to the late usurpation had united all orders of men in the measures that followed the I expulsion of the Decemvirs; but the spirit of cor- diality did not long survive the sense of those Ijuries, and that resentment to a common enemy from which this transient unanimity arose. The Plebeians had removed some part of the eflablifl- meat, in which the Patricians were unequally fa- voured; but they bore with the greater impatience the inequalities which remained, and by which they were still condemned to aCt a subordinate part in the commonwealth. They were fRill excluded from the office of Consul, and from that of the priel- hood. They were debarred from intermarriage with the nobles by an express law, which had been enacted, left the sexes, from paflion, forgetting diffintions, should in this manner unite their diffe- rent ranks; but being now, in some measure, by the late act in favour of the Comitia of the Tribes, become joint or rival sovereigns of the State, they could not long acquiesce in there unequal ditions. A few years after the restoration of the common   30o. wealth, Canuleius, a Plebeian, being one of the Tribunes, moved the celebrated aft which bears his name (mn), to repeal the clause of the Twelve Tables which prohibited the intermarriage of Pa-
(i) Senatfls Confulta.   Legea. (1) Plebifcitt.   Lex Caauleia.     i.
tricians o ., tricians and Plebeians. The other nine Tribunes
-. joined at the fame time in a claim of more impor-
tance-that the office of Consul should be laid open to all the different orders of the commonwealth, and might be held by Plebeians, as well as Patri. cians  . The Senate, and the whole order ol nobles, having for some time, by delays, and by involving the State, as usual, in foreign wars, en- deavoured to suspend the determination of theft questions, were at length obliged to gratify the peop in the less material part of their pretensions, respecting the intermarriage of different ranks, in order, if poflible, to pacify them on the refusal of the more important claim, which related tc their capacity of being eleted into the office ol Consul.
To elude their demands on this material point, it was observed, that of the sacrifices and other du- ties belonging to the priefihood, which, by the fa- cred laws of religion, could be performed only by persons of noble birth, many were to be performed by the Consul, and could not, without profanation, be committed to any person of Plebeian extraction; and that, by this consideration alone, the Plebeians must be for ever excluded from the dignity of Consul. Superstition, for the molt part, being founded on custom alone, no change can be made in the custom, without appearing to defiroy the religion that is founded upon it. This difficulty accordingly put a flop, for a while, to the hasty pace with which the Plebeians advanced to the fulate: but this obfirntiion was at length removed, as many difficulties are removed in human affairs, by a flight evasion, and by the mere change of a name. The title of Consul being changed for that 30. of' Military Tribune, and no sacerdotal funtion
being included in the duties of this office, Ple-
  Dionyf. Hal.
beians,
beians, though not qualified to be Consuls, werec A  allowed to offer themselves as candidates, and to * be elected Military Tribunes with consular power. In this manner the supposed profanation was avoid-  and Plebeians were allowed to be qualified for the highefi office of the State. The mere privilege, however, did not for a considerable time, enable any individual of that order to attain to the honour of first magifrrate of the commonwealth. The Plebeians in a body had prevailed against the law which excluded them; but as separate candidates for office, fiill yielded the preference to the Patri- cian competitor; or, if a Plebeian were likely to prevail at any particular election of Military Tri- bunes, the Patricians had credit enough to have the nomination of Consuls revived in that instance, in order to 'appoint their antagonists."
"Together with the separation of the military and sacerdotal functions, which took place on this oc- cafion, another change, more permanent and of greater moment, was effeced. Ever since the fiitution of the Census, or mutter, the inrolment of the people was become a principal object of the executive power. In the first ages it belonged to the King, together with all the other functions of itate. In the sequel, it devolved on the Consuls; and they accordingly, at every period of five years, by the rules of this office, could dispose of every citizen rank, assign him his class, place him in the rolls of the Senate, or on that of the Knights, or frike him off from either; and, by charging him with all the burdens of a fubjeEt, while they fiript him of the privileges of a citizen, deprive him at once of his political consequence  , and of his fate as a Roman  . () I  ti.   z4. fp) The citizens who came under this predicament were termed rarli."
"These"
"B o. efe regulations were accordingly enforced,"
"- not held up into public view merely to awe the ccy  ppeople. Tle magistrate acually took an account"
"of every citizen estate, inquired into his charac. ter, and afiigned him his place; promoted him to the Senate or to the Knighthood ; degraded or disfranchised, according as he judged the party worthy or unworthy of his freedom, of the rank which he held, or of that to which he aspired in the commonwealth (q)."
"So important a trust committed to the discretion of an officer elected for a different purpose, took its rife in the simplicity of a rude age but continued for a considerable period without any flagrant ex- amples of abuse. It was, nevertheless, that branch of the consular magistracy which the Patricians were least willing to communicate or to Ihare with the Plebeians. While they admitted them, there- fore, to be eleted Tribunes with consular power, they flipulated, that the cha.ge of presiding in the Census, or musters, should be disjoined from it; and that, under the title of Censors, this charge should remain with persons of Patrician birth  . They contended for this reparation, not with a professed intention to reserve the office of Censor to their own order, but under pretence that persons invefied with the consular power, being so fre- quently employed in the field against the enemies of the commonwealth, could not attend to the as- fairs of the city, or perform all the duties of Cen- for at their regular periods."
"But whatever may have been the real motive for separating the department of Censor from that of Consul, the change appears to have been sea- fonably made, and may be confidered as a striking example of that singular felicity with which the Romans, for some time, advanced in their policy,"
"()   ir.  a4.     8."
"as"
"as well as in their fortunes. Hitherto the Romanc A  Consul, being a warrior, was chiefly intent on the  glory he was to reap in the field, and to gain at the expence of the enemies of the State. He dained to seize the advantages which he had in his power, in the capacity of a clerk or accountant en- trulted with the Census, or inrolment of his fellow- citizens; nor does it appear that any peculiar at- tention was given to the choice of Consuls on the year of the Census, as being then veiled with any dangerous measures of power. But confidering the height at which party disputes were then ar- rived, and the great consequence of a citizen rank and place on the rolls, it was no longer safe to en- trust in the fame hands the civil rights of the People, and the executive powers of the State. The Consul, being frequently raised to his fation by party intrigues, and coming into power with the ardour of private ambition and of party zeal, might have easily, in the manner of making up the rolls of the people, gratified his own resentments, or that of his faction. The office of Consul, in his capacity of military leader, was naturally the vince of youth, or of vigorous manhood ; but that cf Censor, when disjoined from it, fell as naturally into the hands of persons of great authority and ex- perienced age; to whom, in the satiety of brighter honours, the People might safely entrust the efli- mate of their fortunes, and the aflignment of their rank. In such hands it continued, for a confider- able period, to be very faithfully discharged; and by connecting the dignities of Citizen, and the ho- nours of the State, with private as well as public virtue, had the happiest effects on the manners of the People."
"The number of Censors, like that of the fuls, was limited to two; but that of the Consular Tribunes was left undetermined, and at fucceflive eletions was augmented from three to eight."
"VOL. I. This"
"B 0 This has given occasion to some hiflorians, who are"
"q uquoted by Livy, to ascribe the institution of this
omce, not to the importunity of the Plebeian par- , but to the exigencies of the State; which being assailed by numerous enemies, and not having as vet devised the method of multiplying comman- ders, under the tities of Proconsul, were led to fubfiitute officers of a different denomination, whose numbers might be increased at discretion. It is indeed probabie, that, in the progress of this government, new inliitutions, and the reparation of departments, were luggeiled no less by the multiplicity of growing affairs, than by the tensions of party, or by the ambition of separate pretenders to power. in the first of those ways, we are led to account for the institution of the Plebeian Ediles, already mentioned; for that of the Praefec- tns Annonh, or Infpetor of the Markets, together with the additions that were, in the courle of there changes, continually made to the number of Qua ftors.
The Quaestors had been long efiablifhed al Rome; they had charge of the public funds, and followed the Kings and the Consuls as commiflaries or provifors in the field. During the bury period which we have been now confidering, their num- ber was augmented from two to four; and the places were filled, for the most part, with Patri- '.  333. cians, though not limited to perbons of this rank.
The Praefeftus Annona, or Infpetor of the Markets, was an officer occasionally named, on a profpec of scarcity, to guard againls famine, anc to provide for the wants of the people. Rome was in fact a place of arms, or a military station often depending as much for subsistence on the foresight and care of its officers, as on the course its ordinary markets. Without a proper attentioi to this particular on the part of the State, the People were exposed to susser from scarcity. On the ap
proache
proaches of famine, they became mutinous andc HA  disorderly, and were ready to barter their fieedom, 1. and the constitution of their country, for bread -3 During the famine which first suggested the fepara- of this trust from that of the ordinary officers of State, Sp. Maelius; a Roman Knight, being pof- sessed of great wealth, engrossed great quantities of corn; and having it in his power to ftpply the wants of the poor, endeavoured to form a dange- rous party among them, and, by their means, to raise himself to the head of the commonwealth. The Smnate took the alarm, and, as in the most dangerous crisis of the liate, had recourse to the nomination of a Dictator. Melius being cited to appear before him, and having refused to answer; was put to death.
The care of iupplying the people with corn, which had been at this time committed to  Minucius, was from thenceforward entrusted to citizens of the first rank, and the ofice itself came necessary in the political establishment of the commonwealth.
Hitherto we have confidered the Roman Repub- lic as a scene of mere political deliberations and councils, prepared for contention, and seemingly unable to exert any united strength. The State, however, presented itself to the nations around it under a very different afpeLt, as a horde of warri- ors, who had made and prefcrved their acquifi- tions by force, and who never betrayed any signs of weakness in the foreign wars they had to maintain.
In their transition from monarchy to republic, indeed, there seems to have been a temporary termillion of national exertions. Private citizens, annually raied to the head of the republic, did not with their elevation acquire the dignity of princes; they did not command the fame refpeat from their fellow-citizens at home, nor had the fame confider- 2 ation o ation from rival nations abroad. The frequent
dissentions of the people seemed to render them an '^ easy prey to their enemies. During the life of"
"Tarquin many powers united against them in half of the exiled king. They were firipped of their territory, confined to the walls of their city, and deserted by their allies  . The fortune of the State seemed to fall with its monarchy. The event, however, belied there appearances, and the power of the annual Magiiiracy soon became more for- midable abroad, though iels awful at home, than that of the Monarch. The republican government fought for respite from domeflic trouble in the midst of foreign war, and the forces of the State, inflead of being refirained, were impelled into action by intestine divisions. The ambition with which the lower ranks of the people endeavoured to watch their superiors, the solicitude with which the higher order endeavoured to preserve its distinction, the exercise of ability which, in this contest, was common to both, enabled them to as againfi so- reign enemies with a spirit that was whetted, but not worn out, in their domeflic quarrels."
"The consuls annually eleced, brought to the helm of affairs a frefl vigour of mind. and conti- nual supplies of renewed ambition. Every officer, on his accellion to the magistracy, was in hafe to ditinguifh his administration, and to merit his tri- umph; and numerous as the enemies of the public appeared, they were not sufficient to furnish every Roman Consul, in his turn, with an oppor- tunity to earn this envied diitinaion. It was given only to those who obtained a&ual victories, and who killed a certain number of their enemies (i)."
"In this nursery of warriors, honours, tending to excite ambition or to reward military merit, were not confined to the leaders of armies alone: The"
"  Diony. fal.     Five thousand in one field."
"vitorious"
"vitorious soldier partook in the triumph of hisc A  leader, and had ufbordinate rewards proportioned to the proofs le had given of his valour.  I bear  the scars, said Dentatus (while he pleaded for a share in the conquered lands to himself and his fellow-foldiers),  of five and forty wounds, of"
"which twelve were received in one day. I have  carried many prizes of valour. Fourteen civic
crowns bestowed upon me by those I had saved  in battle. Three times the mural crown; hav- been so often the first to scale the enemies
walls. Eight times the prize of diftinaion in battle. Many tokens of esteem and gratitude from the hands of generals. Eighty-three chains"
"of gold, sixty bracelets, eighteen lances, and twenty-five sets of horfe-furniture, from pri-  vate persons, who were pleated to approve of  my services  ."
"Under the influence of councils so fertile in the invention of military diftindions, and in armies of which the soldier was roused by so many incentives to military ambition, the frequent change of manders, which is commonly impolitic, proved a perpetual renovation of the ardour and spirit with which armies were led. In public deliberations on the fubje& of war, the vehement ambition of indi- viduals proved a continual incentive to vigorous solutions, by which the State not only soon recover- the consequence which it seemed to have loft in its transition from Monarchy, but was speedily en- abled to improve upon all its former advantages, as head of the Latin confederacy; frequently to vanquish the Sabines, the Hernici, the Volsci, and Etrulcans, and, in about a hundred years after the expulsion of Tarquin, to extend its dominion great- ly beyond the territories which had been in the possession of that prince. In one direction, from"
"  Dionyf. Hal.    36. vcl  36,'"
"Faleriunm"
"B o Falerium to Anxur, about sixty miles; and in the"
"L other, from the summits of the Appenines to the  - siea: And Rome, the metropolis of this little em-"
"pire, was become, with a few competitors, one of the principal tiates of Italy."
"The first and nearest object of its emulation at this period was Veie, an Etruscan principality, of which the capital, situated about nine miles from Rome, was built on an eminence, and secured by precipices."
"The Romans, even before the change of their government from the form of a principality to that of a republic, had been in polfellion of the Tiber and both its banks; but on the right of this river were fiill circumscribed by the Veiaentes, with whom they had waged long and desperate wars; and, as may be supposed among rivals in so close a neighbourhood, with imminent danger to both. Veia, according to Dionysius, was equal in extent to Athens, and, like the other Etruscan cantons, was further advanced than Rome in the arts of peace, probably better provided with the resources cf war, but inferior in the magnanimity of its councils and in the courage of its people. The Veiasntes being, after a variety of struggles, beat from the field, they retired within their walls, sus- sered themselves to be inveited, and underwent a siege or blockade of ten years. The Romans, in order to reduce them, continued during those ten years in the field, without any interruption or difiinction of feaions; made secure approaches, fortifying themfeives in the posts which they fuc- ceiively occupied, and in the end entered the place   57. storm."
"In these operations, we are told, that they learn- to make war with more-regularity than they had formerly practised; and having, some little time before, appointed a military pay for such of their people as served on foot, they at this time extended"
"...-~- .. ~ ~the"
"the fame eftablilhment to their horsemen or knights; A  imposed taxes on the people in order to defray this __ expence, and made other arrangements, which soon after enabled them to carry their enterprises to a greater distance, and to conduct them with more order and fyfiem: circumstances which, together with the acceflions of territory and power, gained by the redudion of Veim, rendered this event a markable epocha in the history of Rome."
"The use which they proposed to make of their conquefi was partly founded in the original policy of the State. The practice of incorporating van- quifhed enemies, indeed, with the Roman people, had been long discontinued: for even Tarquin, it is said, had introduced the cuflom. of enslaving captives, and this fate the citizens of, Veia under- went ; but their lands, and the city itself, offered a tempting prize to the conquerors. And accord- ingly it was proposed to transplant into those vacant poifeflions and feats one half of the Roman Senate and people ."
"This proposal was extremely acceptable to per- sons of inferior condition, who hoped to double their pofielsions, and flattered themselves that they might double the power of the State; but it was firenuoufly opposed by the Senate and Nobles, as tending to divide and weaken the commonwealth, and as more likely to restore a rival than to strength- en themselves. It was eluded by a partial division of the Veiaan territory, in which Ceven jugera, or about four English acres, were afligned as the lot of a family; and by these means the more indigent citizens were provided for, without any.hazard of dismembering the itate,"
"But while the Romans were thus availing them- selves of the spoils of a fallen enemy, and probably enjoying, on the extintion of their rival, a more"
"      .. )     4."
".... i than"
"B 0 than common degree of imagined security, they"
"' became themselves an example of the inftabi."
"lity of human affairs; being allailed by a new and unlooked-for enemy, who came like a firoke ol lightning on their settlement, dispersed their people, and reduced their habitations to ashes."
"The Gauls, who are said to have passed the Alps in three several migrations about two hundred years before this date, being now masters of all the plains on the Po, and of all the coasts of the Adriatic to the banks of the river Sena, where they had a set- tlement, which, from their name, was called Sena Gallia; and being flill bent on extending their pof- feflions, or shifting their habitations, had passed the Appenines, and laid siege to Clufium, the capital of a small nation in Tufcany . The inhabitants of this place made application to the Romans for ficcour; but could obtain no more than a deputa- to intercede with the Gauls in their behalf. The deputies who were sent on this business, and commiflioned to only as mediators, having ap- peared in arms on the of the besieged, the Gauls complained of their conduc as a breach of faith, and as a departure from the neutrality which the Romans professed: And being denied fatisfacion on this complaint, they dropped their design on Clufium, and turned their arms against there mediators, who had violated the laws of war. They advanced on the left of the Tiber, found the Romans polfed to receive them on the Allia, a fniall river which was the limit of the Roman territory, in the country of the Sabines, about ten miles from Rome; and, with the fame impetuosity which hitherto attended them, they passed the Allia on the right of the Roman army, drove them into the angle that is formed by the confluence of the two rivers, put all who withflood them to. the"
"()    35, & "
"'sword,"
"'sword, and forced the remainder into the Tiber, A  where numbers perilhed, or, being cut off from their retreat to Rome, were dispersed in the neigh- bouring country."
"This calamity is said to have so much fiunned oru.  363. overwhelmed the Roman people, that they made no farther attempt to defend their city. All the youth that were fit to carry arms retired into the Capitol. The weak or infirm, whether from sex or age, fled as from a place condemned to defiruc-  or suffered themselves to be surprised and cut offin the fireets."
"The Gauls, having employed three days in the pursuit and slaughter of those who fled from the field of battle, on the fourth day advanced towards the walls of Rome. But being alarmed at first by the general desertion of the battlements, which they miitook for an ambuscade or an artifice to draw them into a snare, they examined all the avenues with care before they ventured to enter the gates. The more effetually to dislodge every enemy, they set fire to the city, reduced it to ashes, and took post on the ruins, in order to besiege the Ca- pitol, which alone held out (a). In this fate of affairs, the republic, already so formidable to all its neighbours, was supposed to be extinguished for ever. The fame of its ruin reached even to Greece, where Rome began to be confidered at this time as a rising and prosperous commonwealth  ."
"The Gauls remained in possession of the ruins for fix months; during which time. they made a fruitless attempt to scale the rock on which the Ca- pitol was built; and being repulsed by Manlius, who, for his vigilance and valour on this occasion, acquired the name of Capitolinus, they continued to invest and block up the fortress, in hopes of able to reduce it by famine. The Romans,"
"(a) Plutarch, invit. Camilli.   "
"who"
"B o who were shut up in the Capitol, flill preserved the"
"L forms of their commronwieaith, and made acts in"
"the name of the Senate and People. Sensible that Camillus, under wvhole au!pices they had reduced the city of Veio, and triumphed over many other enemies, now in exile on the score of an invidious charge of embezzling the Ipoils he had won.at.that place, was the fittelt perion to retrieve their affairs; hsey abbolved him of this accusation, reinflated him in the qualification to command their armies  ; and, in order that he might aflemble their allies and col!ic the remains of their late army, which was iperfed in the neighbouring country, veiled him with the power of dictator.. In this extremity of their fortunes, he overlooked his wrongs, cured numbers to retort to his flandard, and hattened to arm for the preservation of his country; He came to the relief of the Capitol at a critical mo- ment, when the besieged, being greatly reduced by famine, had already capitulated, and were pay- a ransom for themselves and their remaining es- secs. Before this transaction was completed, he surprised the besiegers, obliged them to relinquilh their prize, and afterwards, in a decisive battle that was fought in the neighbourhood of Rome, reveng. the diiaiter which his countrymen had suffered on the banks of he Allia  ..."
"Whatever may have been the true account of this famous adventure, the Romans have given it a place in their history, retained a deep impreflion of their danger from the Gauls, and from thence dated the origin of some particulars in their policy, which teem to have arisen from such an imprellion. They set apart particular funds in the treasury, to be spared in all other possible exigencies of. the State, and reserved for a resource in cafe of a Gaulish invasion. They fubijedted the magifirate"
"(' Lir. Iib.   3z. (4) . ib.  43,' "
"to"
"to certain general refiriAions, but allowed an ex A  ception in cafe of an invasion from the Gauls; and  it is likely that, in the age in which they took these alarming impreflions, they had not yet acquired those advantages of discipline and military skill, in which they were afterwards so much superior to the Gauls and other barbarous neighbours  ."
"Although historians have amply supplied the  tail of hiltory before this event, they nevertheless acknowledge, that all prior evidence of facts pe- rilhed in the destruction of Rome; that all records and monuments of what the Romans had formerly been, were then to be gathered from the ruins of cottages, which had been for several months trod- den under foot by a barbarous enemy; that the laws of the Twelve Tables, the People Charters of Right, and the Forms of the Confiitution, were to be collected in fragments of plates which were dug fiom the rubbish of their former habitations; and that nothing remaining to mark the former po- fition of Rome, betides the Capitol, raised on its rock, and surrounded with ruins, the people deli- berated whether they should attempt to renew their settlement on this ground, or transfer it to Veia. It had been formeily proposed to remove to that place one half of the Senate and people. It was then proposed, that they should chufe that as the proper ground on which to restore the name and the feat of their commonwealth.  Why, said the promoters of this design,  attempt at a great ex-  pence, and with so much labour, to clear out the wretched ruins of a fallen city, while we   The establishment of the Legion, and the improvement made in the choice of its weapons and manner of array, are mentioned as ubfequent to this date: And the Romans, it is consflcd, madle lss progiels in every other art than in that of war. Their goncial, Camillus, at his triumph ser the vicory obtained over the Gauls, made his entry into Rome, having his visage paintcd with red; a pracice, lfys Pliny, which is yet to be found among nations of Africa, who remain in a ltate of barbarity, and :which this natural hittorian was inclined to confider as a charaleriftic of kaibarous manners.
' have"
"B o have another, provided with private and public buildings of every fort, yet entire for our recep. '-'   To this specious argument might have
been opposed the consideration of many advan- tages in their former fiuation; its place on a navi. gable river, its command of the pafage from  tium to Etruria, and of the navigation of the Tiber from the descents of the Appenines to the sea. But motives of superstition and national pride were sup- posed to be of greater weight.  Would you, said Cami!lus,  abandon the feats of your ancef-  tors? Would you have Veia restored, and Rome  to periih for ever ? Would you relinquish the al-  tars of the Gods, who have fixed their shrines in  these sacred places; to whose aid you are  debted for 1o many triumphs, and to whom you  owe the conquest of those habitations for which  you now propose to forsake their temples ?"
"Convinced by this argument, the Romans deter- mined to remain in their ancient situation, ceeded to reflore their habitations, and, in the course of a year, accomplished the work of building their city. An .Era from which, as from a second foundation, may be dated the rife of the commonwealth, and the beginning of a period, in which its history, though still controverted in rome particulars, is less doubtful than before, or less figured with fable  . tf) Somre parts, evn of the hiflory that follows, are doubtful. The ^-mcts of Dictators and of Consuls, the reality of entire campaigns, as well a of tingle za ion; are controverted    i.  5. & z6.    55.    38.  ix.  15.): But that which preceded this date refts al- mol on tradirion alone      i.). It serves, however, to inform us what the Romans themf-rIvs believed; and is therefore the bet ment we can ha on the genius and tendency, as well as the origin, Qs Li-cir  tical ;iiilugtion;."
"CHAP."
"C A  III. Scene of foreign War and donmeflic Dispute opened with"
"reviving Rome.-Faction or Conspiracy of Manlius. -Condemnation.-Plebeians eleted into the Office of Coifilar Tribunes.-lAfpire to the Conftlate.- i'he sift Plebeian Confil.-Eftablijhment of the Prcetor.-Patrician Ediles. he Plebeians qualified to hold all the Offices of State.-The Meafiure of Roman Magistracy complete.-Review of the Jiitutioz.-Its feminzg Defets.--But great Suc- ceffes.-Policy of the State refpetfiig foreigni or van- qui/hed Nations.-Formation of the Legion.-Series of Jars.--With the Samnnites, Campaniazns.-'he Tiarentilnes.-Pyrrhius.-Sovereignty of Italy. ferent Footing on which the Inhabitants flood."
"H Romans were not allowed to reflorec A their community, nor to rebuild their habi- Il. tations, in peace. They were invaded by the Equi, .ct the Volsci, the Hernici, the Etruscans, and some of their own Latin confederates  ; who dreading the re-eliablifhment of a commonwealth, from which they had already suffered so much, and whose power was so great an object of their jealousy, made every effort to prevent it. During a period of one hundred and seventeen years which followed, they accordingly had to encounter a fuc- cefflion of enemies, in subduing of whom they came the sovereigns of Italy; while they continued to undergo internal convulsions, which, as former- ly, proved the birth of political institutions, and filled up the measure of their national establish- ment."
"      2, & 16."
"During"
"B o During this period, the Plebeians, far from being"
"i_ satisfied with their past acquisitions, made continual"
"efforts to extend their privileges. The Tribunes, by traducing the Senate, and by displaying, in their harangues, the severities of the Patrician creditor, and the sufferings of the Plebeian debtor, still en- flamed the animosity of their party. The republic itself was so feebly eftablilhed, that ambitious citi- zens were encouraged, by means of faftion raised among persons of the lower class, to have thoughts of filbverfing the government. In this manner Manlius, the famous champion of the Capitol, who, as has been observed, by his vigilance and valour, preserved that fortress from the Gauls, formed a design to usurp the sovereignty. Presuming on his merit in this and other services, he thought himself above the laws; and endeavouring, by his intrigues with the populace, to form a party againfi the State, he incurred, what was at Rome of all impu- tations the most detested, that of aspiring to be King. In opposition to this conspiracy, whether real or fictitious, the republic was committed to the care of a Dictator; and Manlius being brought fore him, endeavoured to turn the suspicion of ma- lice and envy against his accusers. He produced four hundred citizens, whom he had redeemed from their creditors and released from chains. He duced the spoils of thirty enemies slain by himself in battle; forty badges of honour conferred on him by generals under whom he had served; many ci- tizens whom he had rescued from the enemy, and in the number of those he had saved, he pointed at Caius Servilius, second in command to the Dicta- tor, who now carried the sword of the State against the life of a person who had saved his own. And in the conclusion of his defence,  Such were the treasons, he said,  for which  the friends of the People were to be sacrificed to the Senate."
"His"
"His merits in the public service were great, andc A  intitled him to any reward from the people, except I1l a surrender of their liberties. His liberality to the more indigent citizens, if it proceeded from huma- nity, was noble; but if it proceeded from a design to alienate their affections from the public, or tranf- ser them to himself, was a crime; and the most splendid services, confidered as the artifices of a dangerous ambition, were the objects of punish- ment, not of reward."
"The people, it is said, while they had in their view the Capitol, which had been saved by the  gilance and bravery of this unfortunate criminal, hesitated in their judgment; but their meeting adjourned to the following day, and to a diffe- rent place, they condemned him to be thrown from the rock on which he had so lately signalized his valour  ."
"Such alarms to the general fiate of the common- wealth, had -their temporary effec in suspending the animosity of parties; but could not reconcile their interelis, nor prevent the periodical heats which continually arose on the return of disputes. The Plebeians had been now above forty years inu. . 366. poffeflion of a title to hold the office of Consular Tribune, but had not been able to prevail at any election (i). The majority of the Centuries were ilill composed of Patricians; and when candidates of Plebeian rank were likely, by their personal consideration, to carry a majority, the other party, in such particular initances, had influence enough, as has been observed, to revive the election of fuls, a title from which the Plebeians, by Law, were tiill excluded."
"The Plebeians, however, by the zeal of their party, by the afliduity and influence of individuals who aspired to office, by the increase of their num-"
"     . z7. (i)  .  37."
"bers"
"B o bers in the first and second classes, by their alliance"
"L with the Patrician families in consequence of mar- 'nriage, at lalt surmounted these difficulties, obtained"
"the dignity of Consular Tribune for one of their own order, and from thenceforward began to divide the votes of the Centuries with the Patrician candidates. They were accordingly raised in their turn to what was then the firfi office of the State, and in which nothing was wanting but the title of Consul. To this too they were loon led to aspire; and were urged to make the concluding ftep in the rife of their order, by the ambition of a female Patrician; who, being married into a Plebeian family, bore with impatience the mortifications to which she was exposed in the condition of her new relations. She excited her husband, the engaged her own kindred- among the Patricians, she routed the whole Ple- beian party to remove the indignities which yet mained affixed to their race, in being supposed un- worthy to hold the consular dignity.   377. Licinius Stolo, the husband of this lady, and"
"Publius Sextius, another ative and ambitious Ple- beian, were placed in the College of Tribunes, in order to urge this point. They began the exercise of their office by proposing three very important laws: The first intended for the relief of insolvent debtors; by which all payments made on the score of interest, should be deducted from the capi- tal, and three years be allowed to pay off the mainder."
"A second law to limit the extent of eflates in land, by which no citizen should be allowed to engross above five hundred Jugera  , or to have in flock above one hundred bullocks, and five hundred goats and sheep."
"A third law to restore the election of Consuls, in place of Consular Tribunes, with an express provi-"
"  About 300 Englifn Acres,"
"'sion"
"ion that, at least, one of the Consuls hmould be ofc A  Plebeian descent. :."
"The Patricians, having gained some of the Tri- bunes to their party, prevailed upon them to dilTent from their colleagues, and to suspend, by their ne- gatives, all proceedings on the subjea of there laws. - The Tribunes, Licinius and Sextius, in their turn, suspended the usual eleEtion of magi- itrates, and put a flop to all the ordinary affairs of State. -."
"An anarchy of five years enfued , during which time the republic, bereft of all its officers, had no magistracy, betides the Tribunes of the People, who were not legally vested with any.  gree of executive power  . Any alarm from abroad must have suspended the contest at home, and forced the parties to a treaty: but they are said to have enjoyed, in this fiate of domefiic trouble, uninterrupted peace with their neighbours; a cir- cumflance from which we may infer, that, in most of their wars, they were thenfelves the aggressors, and owed this interval of peace to the vacancy of the Consulate, and to their want of the prompters, by whom they were usually excited to quarrel with their neighbours."
"In the several queflions, on which the parties were now at variance, the Patricians contended chiefly for the exclusion of Plebeians from the of- fice or title of Consul; and, as an insuperable bar to their admiifion, ifill infilled on the sacrilegious profanation that would be incurred, by suffering the rites usually performed by the Consuls, to pals into Plebeian hands. This argument, initead of persuading the popular leaders to desist from their claim, only made them sensible that it was necef- fary to remove this impediment by a previous ope- ration, before they attempted to pais through the"
"(I) Fromi .  377 to 3S. (      35. 'I. way"
"B 0 way which it was meant to obftru&. They ap- ,_ peared then for a little to drop their pursuit of the"
"Consulate; they affected to respect the claim of the Patricians, to retain the pofleffions of places which had always been assigned to their order. But they moved, that the number of ordinary attendants on the sacred rites should be augmented from two to ten; and that of these one half should be named of Plebeian extraction."
"While the Patricians continued to rejet this pofal, on account of the effect it was likely to have on their pretensions in general, they gave way fucceflively; and, at the interval of some years, firfi to the acs that were devised in favour of infol- vent debtors; next, to the Agrarian law, or limita- of property in land; and last of all, to the new efiablifhment relating to the priesthood, and to the communication of the Consulate itself to persons of Plebeian rank."
"The authors of the new regulations, knowing that the majority of the Centuries was composed of Patricians, or was still under the influence of that order, were not satisfied with the mere privilege of being qualified to stand for the Consulate. They insisted, that at least one of the Consuls should be a Plebeian; and having prevailed in this, as in the other contested points, the Plebeian party entered immediately on the poffeflion of their new privilege,   397. and railed Publius Sextius, the Tribune, who had"
"been so active in the cause of his constituents, to the office of Consul."
"But while the Patricians thus incurred a repeated diminution of their exclusive prerogatives, they en- deavoured, by separating the judicative from the executi power of the Consul, and by committing the firfi to a Patrician officer, under the title of Pra- tor, to save a part from the general wreck."
"It was intended that the Prator should be fubor- dinate, but next in rank, to the Consul. He was"
"attended"
"attended by two Lictors, and had his commiffionc A  in very general terms, to judge of all differences that should be brought before him, and to hear the-'~ suits of the people until the setting of the fun. This unlimited jurifdidtion, as we fliall have occafi- on to observe, came to be gradually circumscribed by its own precedents, and by the accumulating edits of fuccefive Pretors. One person at firit was supposed able to discharge all the duties of this office; but the number, in order to keep pace with the growing multiplicity of civil affairs, was after- wards gradually increased.
Another political change, by which the Patrici- ans procured some compensation for what they had now surrendered, was made about the fame time. The care of the public shows and entertainments had hitherto belonged to the Ediles of the People. The office of Edile being at its first infiitution ex- pensive, was likely to become gradually more so by the frequent additions which were made to the fefii- vals, and by the growing demands of the people for fh6ws and amusements. The Plebeians plained of this charge as a burden on their order, and the opposite party offered to relieve them of it, provided that two officers for this purpose, under the title of Curile Ediles, should be annually ele&ted from among the Patricians .
By there institutions the Nobles, while they  mitted the Plebeians to partake in the dignity of Consul, reserved to their own order the exclusive right to the.offices of Praetor and Edile: By the lalt of which they had the direEtion of sports and public entertainments; a flation which, in a fiate that was coming gradually under the government of popular assemblies, became, in process of time, a great object of ambition, and a principal access to power.
     42. 2 The OK ; The design or the effect of this inflitution did
.- not escape the notice of the Plebeian party. They  complained, that while the Patricians affected to"
"resign the exclusive title to one office, they had engrossed two others, inferior only in name, equal in consideration and influence. But no exclusive advantage could be long retained by one order, while the other was occasionally possessed of the le- giilative and supreme executive power. All the offices, whether of Praetor or Edile, of Dictator or Censor, were, in process of time, filled with per- sons of either rank; and the distinction of Patrician or Plebeian became merely nominal, or served as a monument of the aristocracy which had subsisted in former ages. The only effea which it now had was favourable to the Plebeians; as it limited the choice of Tribunes to their own order, while, in   17. common with the Patricians, they had access to"
"every other dignity in the State. -  of Such is the account which hiflorians have given te co..ai- us of the origin and progress of the Roman confii- :'' tution. This horde, in the earliest account of it,"
"presented a distinction of ranks, under the titles of Patrician, Equefirian, and Plebeian; and the State, though governed by a prince, had occasional or or- dinary assemblies, by which it approached to the form of a republic. Affembliec to which every citizen was admitted were termed the Comitia; those which were formed of the superior ranks, or of a felecE number, were termed the Senate. Among those who had attained the age of man- hood, to be Noble and to be of the Senate were probably synonymous terms. But after the intro- duction of the Census, separate rolls were kept for the Senate, the Equestrian Order, and the People. These rolls were composed by different officers in fucceflive periods of the State. A Senate was composed of a hundred members by"
"Romu"
"Romulus . This number was augmented orc A  diminilhed at pleaufre by his successors. The --- Consuls succeeded in this matter to the prerogative of the Kings; and the Censors were appointed to exercise it, with the other duties of the Census, as a principal part of their functions. It is remarkable, that, notwithfianding the great importance of the Senate in the government of their country, so little precaution was taken to ascertain who were to be its conflituent members, or to fix their legal number. The body was accordingly flucuating. Individuals were placed or displaced at the discretion of the officer entrufied with the muster, and the numbers of the whole increased or diminilhed indefinitely. The officers of State, though not enrolled, had access to the Senate; but their continuing mem- bers, after their year in office expired, depended on the discretion of the Cenolrs. It seemed to be sufficient for the purposes of this constitution, that the Senate should be a meeting of the superior class of the citizens."
"As the noble and popular Assemblies had theirRe,,, - existence under the Kings, the transition fromion. monarchy to republic in so finall a State, by fublfi- tuting elective and temporary Magistrates in place of the King, was easy. A sufficient occasion was given to it in the abuses which were felt in the last reign of the monarchy. The disorders incident to the Ihock of parties, who were set free from a former controul, required, on occasion, the remedy of a discretionary atithority vefied in Lome person who might be entrufied with the public aIfety, and soon led to the occasional institution of a dictatorial power. The high prerogatives claimed and main-"
"3)   i.   According to Livy the Senate confiled of no more than a hundred mzmbers at the dlath of Roniulus; but, according to Di- onytiuu, their numbers hadi been augmented by a popular clecion at the  . mifion of the Sabincs, iome wvriters lay to Lwo hunor.hd ; others, only to one hundred and fin  Dionyl'    47."
"tained"
"B o tained by one party, obliged the other to assume a"
",pofiure of defence, and to place themselves under"
"the conduct of leaders properly authorised to vindi- cate their rights. These rights were underflood by degrees to imply equality, and, in the fucceflive ftitutions that followed, put every citizen in posses- sion of equal pretensions to preferment and ho- nours; pretensions which were to be limited only by the great distinction which Nature has made tween the capacities, merits, and characters of men, and which are subjet, in every community, to be warped by the effeCts of education and fortune."
"New departments of State, or additions to the number of officers employed in them, were conti- nually fuggefied by the increase of civil affairs; and while the territory of the republic was but a small part of Italy, the measure of her political govern- ment was full, and the lift of her officers complete. Fundions which, in the firit or simplest ages, were either unknown or had been committed to the King alone, were now thrown into separate lots or departments, and furnished their several occu- pations to two Consuls, one Prator, two Censors, four Ediles, and eight Qeftors, besides officers of there different ranks, who, with the titles of Proconsul, Propraetor, and ProquaeRor, and with- out any limitation of number, were employed wherever the exigencies of the State required their service."
"In this account of the Roman constitution we are come nearly to that state of its maturity  at which Poiybius began to observe and to admire the felicity of its institutions, and the order of its  minifiration. The Plebeians were now reconciled to a government to which they themselves had ac- cess, and citizens of every rank made great efforts"
"A; * A.:; 1iao tha i thd an sixth ce:ntries of Rome."
"of"
"of industry in a State in which men were allowedc A '. to arrive at eminence, not only by advantages of . fortune, but likewise by personal qualities. The ' Senate and Assemblies of the People, the Magif- trates and Selet Commissioners, had each their  partments, which they administered with an ap. pearance of sovereign and absolute sway, and without any interfering of interests orjealoufy of power."
"The Consuls were detined to the command of armies; but, while at Rome, seemed to have the highest prerogatives in the administration of all civil and political affairs. They had under their mand all the other officers of State, except the Tri- bunes of the People; they introduced all foreign ambassadors; and they alone could move the Se- nate on any subjeA of deliberation, and put their, ats or determinations in writing. The Consuls, too, presided with a similar prerogative in the As- fembly of the Centuries and in that of the Curiae, proposed the question, collected the votes, declared the majority, and framed the at. In all military preparations, in making their levies as well as in the command of the army, they were vested with high degrees of discretionary power (q) over all the troops of the commonwealth, composed of Roman citizens or allies. They commanded the treasury, as far as necessary to the service on which they were employed, and had one of its Commiflioners, or Quaestors, appointed to attend their court, and to receive their orders."
"The Senate, however, had the ordinary admini- firation of the revenue, took account of its receipts and disbursements, and suffered no money to be issued without their own decree, or the warrant of the Consul in atual service. Even the money  (q) Vid. Zonar.  5o1. Frontini Stragemata,   Val. Max.   7."
"creed"
"o i creed by the Censors for the repair of public build. _' ings, and the execution of public works, could not"
"be liued by the Qnaflors without an a of the Se- nate to authorise it. All crimes and disorders that were committed among the free inhabitants of Italy, or municipal allies of the State, all disputes of a pri- vate or public nature that arose among them, came under the jurisdiction and determination of the Se- nate. All foreign emba!lies were received or patched, and all negociations were conducted, by this bcdy. In such matters tle People did no more than affirm or reverse what the Senate, after mature deliberation, had decreed, and for the most part gave their content as a matter of form; info- much, that while persons, who oblerved the high executive powers of the Consul, confidered the State as monarchical; foreigners, on the contrary, who retorted on public bufinels to Rome, were apt to believe it an ariilocracy vested in the Senate."
"The People, notwithfianding, had reserved the tovereignty to themselves, and, in their several as- !emblies, exercised the pow'ers of legislation, and conferred all the offces of State  . They like- ise, in all criminal matters, held the fupremeju- ifdiction. In their capacity of sovereign, they were the sole arbiters of life and death; and, even  their capacity of lubjeds, did not submit to .aints which, in every other State, are found ne- ceilarv to government."
"A citizen while accused of any crime, continued at liberty until sentence was given against him, and might ithdraw from his prosecutors at any stage of the trial, even while the last Century was deli- vering its votes. A voluntary banifllment from the Forum, from the meetings of the Senate, and the :' In  rz:- = it-.. ennaRd !aw., cnd  the offcer: of State. '- Cu'i:  - .:. ,'. ; rnEi ' :ry command.
assemblies
assemblies of the People, was the highefi punifh A  ment, which any citizen, unless he remained to ex- ~. pose himself to the effects of a formal sentence, was obliged to undergo; and it was expressly ftipu- lated, that, even at Tibutr or Pranefte, a few miles from Rome, a conviAt who had withdrawn from judgment should be safe  ."
"Parts so detached were not likely to act as one body, nor to proceed with any regular concert; and the State seems to have carried, in all its eftablilhments, the feeds of dissention and tumult. It was long supported, nevertheless, by the un- common zeal of its members in favour of a monwealth in which they enjoyed so much free- dom, and in which they were vested with so much personal consequence."
"The several members of the conflitution, while in appearance supreme, were in many respects  pendent on each other."
"The Consuls, while in office, had the meetings 'and determinations of the Senate and People, in a"
"reat measure, in their power; but they received this power from the People, and were account- able for the dilcharge of it at the expiration of their office."
"The Senate could resolve, but they could not execute, until they had obtained from the People a confirmation of their ads, and were obliged to solicit the Tribunes for leave to proceed in any matter which these officers were inclined to oppose."
"The Senate was confiituted, or formed, at regu- lar periods, at the discretion of the Consuls or Cenr fors, officers named by the People. (!) The lawv of Publilius, which gave the- poer of Iciiiation to the Plebeian AtTemblies, and that of Valerlu-, .:hich fcc::rcd every citizcn in the right of appeal to the People at large, after being pea:rdly .enacea, .'are now in full force     . .)."
"The"
"B 0 0 The city, nevertheless, was over-awed by the"
"Senate and officers of State. On great and alarm. occasions, the People themselves were no longer sovereigns than they were allowed by the Senate and Consuls to hold this character. The Senate and Consuls having it in their power to name a Dictator, could at once transfer the sovereignty of the State to a single person, and subjet every citizen to his authority. Every individual held his place on the rolls at the will of the Censors, and his perty at the disposal of courts that were composed of Senators; the servants of the Public in general, who aimed at lucrative commissions, depended on the Senate, as administrators of the treasury, and trustees in the collection or disbursements of the public money  ; and every Roman youth, when embodied in the legions, entrufled his honours and his life in the hands of the Consul, or Commander in Chief  ."
"The mats, however, was far from being so well compacted, or the unity of power so well eftab- liihed, as I'peculative reasoners Sometimes think ne- ceffary for the order of government. The Senate and the popular Aflemblies, in their legislative ca- pacities, counteracted one another. The numbers required to constitute a legal Assembly of the People, the qualification of a citizen which intitled him to be confidered as a member of the common- ( The influence which the Senate pofrffed as administrators of the publi. treasury, according to Poiybius, was very great. They had a num- . of ccmmiiions to give, in the collection of various duties levied on the  igators of river:, the entry to fca-ports, the produce of mines, and  rref or public lodr, chiefly let out for pallurage. They had likewile .der2l-: difunfenments on the repair of highwayv and public buildings, and    erecut.ic of a varitt of other works. In such tranfaclions great :.ntbars of people were concerned, a' contractors, as partners with thole who contrated with &he Senate, or as creditors who advanced money to nsrl'i the cont.racor; to er-form their articles. In all there several capa- citits the parties depended on the : -il of the Senate, and continually at- -n3ed at the door of thi ar afmbly, soliciting commifionc, pleading for hS: :erant of fomre con ition, for delay in the execution or Cbme Jjricle .: rlief in the care  unforcfeen hard'fip or ioft."
"i .-) A.  ib. Ci . 1c nt; 12.i 3 , 14."
".vealth;"
"wealth, were fiillundetermined. Aliens fettling at A  'Rome were admitted on the rolls of'the People,  and citizens removing to the colonies were omitted.  Laws, therefore, might be obtained in a clandefiine I manner,,when the People, not sufficiently aware iof the consequence of fuch.laws, did not attend; ior the queftionr might be determined by the voice iof a tingle alien, as often as the division was nearly equal, and a designing magifirate chore to place Iany number of aliens on the rolls for this pur- pose  . The State took its laws, not only from"
"the (.) In the settlement of Romulus, recruits of every quality, whether outlawv, fugitives, or captives, were received without diRfinOion.-In the firi ates of the republi, aliens fettling at Rome we admitted as citizens, -nd ieen placed on the rolls of the Senate.-The Taiquinr, and the sirs of ilte Claudian amly, were emigrants from the neighbouring cantons.- After the eftablifhmcnt of the Census or periodical muster, the King, the Consuls, and, laRd all, the Cenlors, made up the rolls of the Senate and People at pleasure. They admitted upon it very readily every inhabitant of the city who claimed to be inrolled ; but when a right of voting in any of , the popular afirmblies at Rome came to be confidered as a privilere of moment, the inhabitants of Latium crowded to Rome in order to obtain it. i They were sometimes put upon the rolls by one Consul, and forbid the city by hi, colleague; and in every such cafe the negative, by a maxim of the Roman policy, prevailed.-Such as nadually fettled at Rome, sooner or :' later found means to be inserted in the Tribes; and the towns of Latium complained, that they were deserted by numbers of their people, who : sotcd to Rome for this purpose, and that they were likely to be popu- laced. They obtained a law, by which Latin emigrants were excluded from the rolls of the Roman People, except they had left ofs'.pring to replace them in the country towns they had left. And this seems to have been the firfe law enactie at Rome to regulate or reStrain the naturalization of aliens. Some authors have affirmed, that, even while aliens were so easily admitted on the rolls of the People, Roman citizens, accepting of settlements in the colonies, forfeited their political rights. In this, however, it is probable, that the effets of mere absence have been miltaken for an express and for- : mal exclusion. Whoever ccafed to give in his name at the Census, or"
"h.oever left his ward or tribe in the city to reftde at a dillance, was not rolled in the ward, nor placed in any class. It did not follow, however, that he had forfeited his right, or might not claim it as often as he attended the Census. In this cafe he was upon a foot of equality with every other citizen, and in the fame manner received or rejected at the will of the Cen- for, or other officer who took the muster. In this account of the Roman colonies, writers have followed the account of Sigonius, whose opinion, in every circumfrance relating to the Roman hiolry, is of great authority. . In this particular, however, it happens, that i the principal passage he has quoted in support of his opinion, is by some accident strangely perverted. Livy relater,  xxiv.  4z. that the people of Ferentinum, in the year of Rome five hundred and fifty-feven, ila,-ted a new pretension, by which all Latins who gave their names to be inlfribed . in any Roman colony should be conllidred asRomoan citizens; but that the"
"Senate"
"Bo  the Assemblies, which were held, howver irT-."
"gulariv, within the capital, but from mirit;ry detachments and armies, when abroad in the field  . Yet, under all there defets, as we have repeated occasions to observe, they enjoyed the mrof envied difiinftion of nations, continual prof. perity, and an almost uninterrupted fucceflion of Ssnr rejcred this claim when offered by persons who were annexed to teS cu!'nic of Putcoli, Salernum, and Buxentum. Nv:remjors er anrsa Freerr sasi=sr cr'-, ut Latini. qu in ee:lcniam Rcmar.arm namina dedrisen-, . R.:rai re:. .ire -, Saclerur.que et Buxentum adfcripti car.i, : ir.-- d -= -ir. rb pftr: Cidsii Rrnaris ferrent ; Senatus jidtca:sil  {:i cs.:-  r-. There was a dillindlion between Roman coloncs iid tuln.nics of Romrn citizens. The firit might be Latins, or other allii pianted unter the authority of the Roman State. The second were pro. babiv iitirens. And the whole amount of this passage was to prove, that Lain:' rce not to be confidercd as Roman citi:ens, merely because they rsfided in frme colony of Roman cilizen'. But the quotation of Signniu; is as follow.. and rives a wonderful ,ervcrlion to the passage in quellion:  a.-;iu;  I-ei al, iib.   3.  Quare afcripti coloni nomine qui. ' dm crant cis Rn -ani, re vcro co!oni. Tellem poftulatis ? non longe * :biero. Prcio cfl 'vius qui fcribit,  xixiv. Puteolos, Salernumtt *' Bcxtr.Cm cr:3' i r-ar. Adfcripsi coloni, qui nomina dedelant cum bo  ec pro ciribum ecrrcnt; Srna!ls ijdicaffc non tfTe cos cires Romano-;  ct al.:  nrrzt Fcr-ntinatc nInvum jus tentiffe, ut atini, qui in colo- nIzm Romanr- nos-.  ddch'icnt ivrcRomani efnot- The perversion of tL-; oun:sir  remarkable. Different clufee of fame senten arc quo: 'a- 1'. . sliage in different parts of the an. thor. The o fr the 2ulf i- so piaced, that the of the sirs in ey- rlainig the iecond ir i!'i:, ar.i  xorls :ur. r.an. are infelted. The pra'a in . aiTclt;ng that rv .Lai., pleaded to be admitted a cili. cn, bhca   ther reni.icd in fomr  lon; of citizen-, proves the revcrfe 9: .vsi- Sinn:nus rar.ait-inr.  that citizen' removing to colenies ere di1. franch  The ct  tt, ina tcrne ni .ivy and other hi'torianF, the diflinfli- con lbctvcn Ronm citi na, swhether of city or of the colonies, anil other inhabitrnt of Italy, wva become a matter of antiquity and of mcre urlrfi: ; end tshereore is not  tl- so fully and diftinthl ll ated, as no ) a  as dlsputc. The col.enil ccaling to attend at clecions, or in thi A-ff. of the i'eopli, and! not giving in their names at the multcr,  -''  :rnml vs to tthe errses ' politive cxclufion, although it i  .!!.. fu cxci;'  had taken place; for even aliens were not ex cluj by an3) .olsti'Ce 1  and might he admitted on the rolls at the dil ;-rtiion of the icc  prccidcl over the mulier. Antiquarian', i rart of ancient conlitution, fiomntimes fuppnfe that rules mutl har ex;rie.i, in ordr to have tbh pleasure of conlccuiing what they were. (_ ) oThe Cn  arciu-,   39gS, being encamped at Suarium i Erruria, arTembled his army in their Tribes, and psaiTed a law to railc :  Tith prnny on the ice of every Slave that (hould- be manumitte. The Senite, being pI-aled with the tax, confirmed the act; but the Tr bunes, alarmed : the pr-cedcnt, obtained a resolution, by which it  -iclired for the fultr te be'capitr! for any person to propose any / I '.ch -iJetchcd or pjrt,.! Afnemblics of the copl.      16.).
ftatefmes
statesmen and warriors unequalled in the hirtory ofc A  mankind.  In about one hundred years after they began tout.  45. reitore their city from the ruins in which it was laid by the Gauls, they extended their sovereignty from the farthetl limits of Tuscany on the one  to the sea of Tarentum and the firaits of Meflina on the other; and as the contelt of parties at home led to a succession of political eftablilhments, their fre- quent wars fuggefied the policy which they adopt- refpeating foreign nations, and the arrangement of their national force.
They had for some time discontinued the prac- tice of admitting captives into the number of their People; but continued that of extending and fe- curing their acquisitions, by colonies of their own citizens, or of such allies as they could most fe- curely trust. They exacted from the cantons of Italy which they vanquished, contributions of sub- fifence and cloathing for the benefit of their ar- mies; and they generally imposed some condition of this fort as a preliminary to every negociation or treaty of peace  .
Their forces confined of native Romans, and ofu.  45. their allies in Italy, nearly in equal parts. The le- gion, lays Livy, had been formerly arrayed in a continued line, or compacted column (a) but, in the course of the wars which led to the conquest of Italy, came to be formed in divisions, and had ferent orders of light and heavy-armed infantry, as well as cavalry. The light-armed infantry were called the Velites, and were supposed to ply in the front, on the flank, or in the rear of the army; and their service was, to keep the heavy- armed foot undisturbed by mifliles till they came into close action with the enemy.   I     i. & 2.  ix.  43.    5. & 37. (a)     8.
The O Ki The heavy-armed foot confiled of three orders,
called the Hailati, Principes, and Triarii; of whom 'a-- each had its separate divisions or manipules; and"
"those of the different orders were placed in three different rows, and at diflances from each other, equal to the front of the division. By this difpofi. the manipules of the first and second row could either at separately, or, by mutually filling up their intervals, could complete the line, leaving the Tri- arii, in time of adion, as a body of reserve, to sup- port the line, or fill up the place of any manipule that might be forced by the enemy. And, in or- der to facilitate occasionally this change of difpofi.  the divisions of one row faced the intervals of the other  . They were armed with the pilum,"
"which   This account of the Roman legion is not without its difficulties. It appears irrational to break and disperse the Itrength of a body in this man- ner; and Cwfar makes no mention of any such diltincion of orders, of the mznipule% of the rows in which they were formed, or of the intervals at hich they fought. Hi, legion consisted of ten cohorts, formed from right to left on a continued front. Polybius, however, one of the best military hifiorians, and himself an eye-witness of the dilpofition of the Roman le- gon in acion, as well as on the parade, is very explicit in this account of it; refers to it in the description of the Roman march (Polyb.    38), in the refcriFtion of every battle (Polyb.  iii.  1, 2, 3, 4), and(Po- !yb.    xo.) in ttating the comparative advantages of the Roman le- gion and Macedonian phalanx (Polyb.  xvii.  a8.). The phalanx in: a column of indefinite depth, close ranks, and a continued front, with lances or spears, it was impregnable to the fhert sword and loose order of ite Romans, so long as it preferred its front entire, and the spear-man made no opening for the Roman soldier to enter within the point of his weapon. It is observed that the Romans made their attack in separate divifioon and at inactrrra! in order to-bring on some irregularity in the frontof the pbtaanx, and in order to make some openings by which the Roman foldicr could enter with his sword, and, once within the point of his enemy sp:ar, could perform great slaughter with little resistance (Plutarch in vit.  Emiiii. Li. i ib. xliv.  4r. Neque ulla evidentior caufa viaoria fu qnam quod mula pzffim pralia erant qnu fuclauantes; turbarant pri- mo, deinde disjcerunt phalanges). From this account then it is probable, that the Romans did not divide their legion into orders and manipules, nor sigh t interval, until after they adopted the short stabbing sword, which ia said to have been originally from Spain; and that they continued to make this disposition so long only as they had to do with enemies who used the fpiar and continued front; that after the social war in Italy and their own civil wars began, they discontinued the separate manipules, and fought to tlrergthen themselves againll an army like their own, by senting a continu-.i front. Livy accordingly marks the time at which the formation  man:pl-.1s, at intervals, was adopted. Polybius marks the"
"continuance"
"which was a heavy javelin or spear to be cast at the A  enemy, and with a short and massy sword fitted to . firike or to thrust. They bore an oblong shield, four feet high by two and a half feet broad, with a hel- met, breastplate, and greaves."
"In the ftruaure of there weapons and this defen- five armour, the Romans consulted at once both the principal causes of courage in a soldier, his fcioufnefs of the means to annoy his enemy, and of a. power to defend himself. And with these  vantages they continued for ages to prevail in motl of their conflicts, and were the model which other nations' endeavoured to imitate   in the form of their armies, and in the choice of their weapons."
"It is understood in the antiquities of this People, that when they were assembled for any purpose, whether of state or of war, they were termed the Army. In their musters a Plebeian was a foot fol- dier, the Knight a horseman, and the Legion a mere detachment of the whole, draughted for the year, or embodied for a particular service. The men, as well as the officers, in the first period of the History of the Republic, were annually lieved or exchanged; and even after it ceased to be the pratice thus annually to relieve the private men, and after the fame legions were employed during a succession of some years, yet the People, to the. latest period of the commonwealth, conti- nued to form the armies of their country; and the officer of Rate wasftill understood to command in virtue of his civil magiitracy, or in virtue of a mi- continuance of it, and Crefar evidently marks the discontinuance of it. It is extremely probable, that the last change was one of those made by Ma- rius, and was introduced into the Roman armies in the social war. The three orders of Hatati, Principes, and Triarii, were extremely per to mark the distinction of cla(fes fubfilting among Roman citizens, who were, nevertheless, all of them equally bound, on occasion, to serve in the condition of private soldiers: And this may be one rcafon to incline us to aferibe the discontinuance of this distribution to Marius, who was a great leveller of ranks."
"  Polyb.    17, 18, 19x o0, , zi2, 23, 24."
"litary"
"B O litary qualification which never failed to accompany _,. it. No citizen could aspire to any of the higher"
"offices in the commonwealth, until he had been rolled in the Legions, either ten years if on horse- back, or sixteen years if on foot; and, notwith. standing the special commifiions that were occafi- onally given for separate objects of Rate or of war, civil and military rank were never disjoined. Equal care was taken to furnish the rising itatefman and warrior with the technical habits of either profef- sion; or rather to inftrunt him, by his occasional application to both, not to mistake the forms of of- fice in either for the business of frate or of war, nor to reft his pretensions to command on any accom- plifhment short of that superior knowledge of man- kind, and those excellent personal qualities of pe- netration, sagacity, and courage, which give the person poffefled of them an ascendant, as a friend or as an enemy, in any scene or department of hu- man affairs. It may be difficult to determine, whe- ther we are to confider the Roman eitablifhment as civil or military; it certainly united, in a very high degree, the advantages of both, and conti- nued longer to blend the profelfions of state and of war together, than we are apt to think confitent with that propriety of character which we require in each: but to this very circumfiance, probably, among others, we may safely ascribe, in this tinguifhed republic, the great ability of her coun- cils, and the irresistible force with which they were executed  ."
"During a period of about one hundred and twenty years after the rebuilding of Rome, the Ro- mans were engaged in a continual series of wars; first with the Latins and with their own colonies, who wished to disengage themselves from so une. qual an alliance; afterwards with the Etruscans or"
"  Polyb.   17."
"tll("
"the one hand, and with the Samnites, Campanians A ip. and Tarentines on the other. They quarrelled with the Samnites first in behalf of the Campanians, who, in order to obtain their protection, made a surrender of themSelves and of all their poffefiori This aft of surrender they afterwards had occasion to enforce againfi the Campanians themnfelves, who endeavoured, whet too late, to recover their liber- ties."
"The Samnites were a fierce nation, inhabiting that trat ofithe Appenines which extends from the confines of Latium to those of Apulia; and who, to the advantages of their' mountainous fitua-  joined some iingular and even romantic infli- tutions  , which enabled them, during above forty years, from the time at which their wars with the Romans began, to maintain the contetl  , and to keep the balance of power in fufpence."
"During the dependence of this quarrel, the Ro- inan armies frequently penetrated into Lucania and Apulia, and before they had reduced the Samnites, were known as protectors and allies, or had forced their passage as conquerors to the southern extremi- ties of Italy. And the State itself, under a variety of titles, was in reality the head, 'or held a species of sovereignty over all the nations who occupied that part of the peninsula."
"The city of Tarentum, the molt powerful of the Greek settlements in this quarter, having ne- gleAed her military establishments in proportion as she advanced in the arts of peace; was alarmed at the near approach of tle Romans, and applied for protetion to Pyrrhus the king of Epirus, atu .4i3   Of this fort it is mentioned, that ten of the fairet of ore sex were annually fcleacd as prizes to be won by the braved and most deserving of the other. Strabo,   fin. The Samnites furnished Roman generals With the fabjea of tweity-four triuniphs, but.mixed with checks and dif graces more remarkable than any they had received in the course of their wara with any other nation. Florus,  i.  16."
"      3i.  I. that"
"B OO Kthat time greatly ditinguifhed among the military"
"adventurers of Macedonia and Greece. They -wifhed to employ the military skill of this prince,"
"without being exposed to fall a prey to his ambi-  and invited him to come, without any army of his own, to take the command of their people, whose numbers they magnified, in order to induce him to accept of their offer. But, like most foreign military protectors, he appears to have had, toge. ther with many schemes of ambition against those on whom he made war, some designs likewise on the State he was brought to defend. With this double intention he did not rely on the forces of Tarentum, but passed into Italy at the head of a numerous army, formed on the model of the Ma. cedonians, and accustomed to service in the wars of that country and of Greece."
"This is the first enemy whose forces can be fidered as a known measure, with which to pare, or by which we can estimate, the power and military attainments of the Romans. They had been vitorious in Italy, 'but the charater and prowess of the enemies they had vanquished are unknown. This prince knew the arts of war as they were pratifed in Macedonia and in Greece, and was reputed one of the first captains of that or any other age  . He accordingly prevailed over the Romans in some of their first encounters; but found that partial victories did not subdue this peo- ple, nor decide the contest. Having vast schemes of ambition in Sicily and Africa, as well as in Italy, he suddenly suspended his operations against the Romans, to comply with an invitation he received from Syracuse, to possess himself of that kingdom   Pyrrhnu, it is said, was trruck with the military afpeCf of the Ro ans, and admired in particular the form of their encampments. Greeks always endeavoured to avail themselves of natural strengths, an accommodated the disposition of their camp to the ground; but the Ro mans, truioing only to their artificial works, pitched on the plain, and al ways encamped in the fame form. Plutarch in vit. Pyrrhi."
"iI"
"in behalf of his son, who had some pretensions to itc A  in the right of Agathocles; .from whom he was  scended."
"In order to pursue this object, he endeavoured to obtain a peace or cessation of arms in Italy; but was told, that, in order to treat with the Romans, lie must evacuate their country and return to his own  . With this answer he passed into Sicily; and after some operations which were successful, though not sufficiently supported by:his partisans in that country to obtain the end of his expedition, he returned again into Italy for the defence of Ta- rentum; but found that during his absence the Ro- mans had made a considerable progress, and were in condition to repay the defeats they had suffered in the beginning of the war. Having brought this matter to the proof in several encounters, he mitted the defence of Tarentum to one of his offi- cers; and after this fruitless attempt to make quefis beyond the Ionian Sea, in which he had em- ployed fix years, he returned to his own country."
"The Romans continuing the.war against Taren  4a8. turn, in about two years after the departure of Pynhus from Italy, made themselves masters of the place. Here, it is mentioned, they found, for the firfi time, the plunder of an opulent city, taining the models of elegant workmanship in the fine arts, and the apparatus of an exquisite luxury."
"In former times, fays Florus,  the vitorious generals of Rome exhibited in their triumphs herds of cattle driven from the Sabines and the
Volsci, the empty cars of the Gauls, and broken  arms of the Samnites: but in that which was"
"hewn for the conquest of Tarentum, the  ceflion was led by Theflalian and Macedonian captives, followed with carriages loaded with  precious furniture, with pitures, itatutes, plate,
   Epitome,  xiii. Plutarch in.vit. Pyrrb.
G2 and
\  and other ornaments of silver and gold (i).
1- Spoils which, we may guess, in the firfi exhibition
of them, were valued at Rome more as the public trophies of victory, than felt as the baits of pri- vate avarice, or the objects of a mean admiration. The Roman citizen as yet lived content in his cot- tage, filrniflied in the rudest manner; and he sub- filled on the fimpieit fare, the produce of his own labour. Curius Dentatus, the Consul who obtain- this triumph, having the offer of fifty jugera as a reward from the public for his services, would accept of no more than seven. This, he laid, is the ordinary portion of a citizen, and that person must be an unworthy member of the common- wealth who can with for more  . 5.  45. From the reduction of Tarentum the Romans
may be confidered as the sovereigns of Italy, al- though their dominion was extremely ill defined, either in respect to its nature or to its extent. They but in a few instances laid claim to absolute fove- reignty, and least of all over those who were mofl fubmiflive to their power. It was their maxim to spare the obsequious, but to crush the proud (/); an artful profeflion, by which, under the pretences of generosity and magnanimity, they flated them- selves as the sovereign nation. Under this sumptuous maxim their friendship was to be ob- tained by fubminfion alone; and was, no less than (i) Flous,  i.  18.   A Roman citizen in thit period might, by the Law of Licinius, have Fn elrate of Tve hundred jrgera, or about three hund acres; but the ordinary patrimony of a noble family was probably far below this mea- frre; and the lot of a citizen in the new colonies fcidom exceeded fcrcn ,erv. The people were lodged in cottages and lept on Craw (Ilin.  xviii.  3. Cicer. pro Roflio, Val. Max.    3.). The Ro- manz till a htt!- tbefore the ficge ofTarentum, had no coin but copper, and climzrtcd confidcrable fums more commonly by the head of cattle tha by moncy. They coined filvcr for the sirs time   3z5. Gold wa known as-  cious material, and was rometimes joined with oxen in thi resward  diftinguilied services.     3o.  Epitomrn I  -.a: (i) Parcere fubjcAcs  debellare fuperbos.
their
their enmity, fatal to those who embraced it. Thec A  title of ally was, for the most part, no more than a specious name, under which they disguised their dominion, and under which they availed them- selves of the tfrength and resources of other nati- ons, with the least poflible alarm to their jealousy or pride.
With the Latins they had early formed an alli- ance offensive and defensive, in which the parties mutually fiipulated the number of troops to be fur- nilhed by each; the respective shares which each was to have in the spoils of their common enemies, and the manner of adjufling any disputes that might arire between them. This was the league which the Latins were fbppofed to have so fre- quently broken, and of which the Romans so often exacted the observance by force (in).
In the first iruggles 'which they made to restore their settlement deltroyed by the Gauls, and in the subsequent wars they had to maintain, during a hundred years, in support of their new establish- ment, different cantons of there original confede- rates, as well as many of their own colonies, had taken very different parts, and in the treaties which ensued, obtained, or were sentenced to different conditions; some were admitted to the freedom of Rome, and partook in the prerogative of Roman citizens. A few were, by their own choice, in ference to the charafter of Roman citizens, per- mitted to retain the independency of their towns, and were treated as allies. Others, under pretence of being admitted to the freedom of Rome though without the right of suffrage, were deprived of their corporation eftablilhments, and with the ti- tle of Citizens, treated as fubjeds. A few were governed in form by a military power, and
 ) Dionyf. Hal.    415.     xo.  ix.  43.
by o by a PrafeCt or Magistrate annually sent from
Rome .
From this unequal treatment arose the variety of conditions by which the natives of Italy were tinguifhed, as Colonies, Municipal Towns, Allies, Prafeetures, or Provincial Governments, until about 18 years after this date, when, as will be mentioned in the sequel, the whole was put upon the fame foot- by the general admission of all the Italians upon the rolls of the Roman People. (=) The city of Capna, together with its diftria of Campania, was the first example of a provincial govemment eftablilhed by the Romans in any of their conquetrs. The Campanians, in order to be proteted againlt the Samnites, had delivered themselves up to the Romans. But they soon after became fenfble or their folly, in trutting their defence to any force but their own, or in resigning their power as a State, with a view to preserve any thing else. When they perceived this error, they endeavoured, in conjunc- with some of their neighbours, to form a party againlt their new matters; and being defeated in their attempts to recover their independence, were treated with the severity that is commonly employed against rebel fabject. Their fente and popular assembly, under pretence of fupprefing seminaries of action, were abolished, and a Przfect or Governor annually appointed    ix.  za.). A similar course, ynder the fame pretence, was soon after taken with Antiam    ix.  at.). This had been the principal ea-port of the Volsci, and along the head of many formidable ambinations againll the Romans.  A   Limits of Italy.-Contiguous Nations.-Ligurians.-
Gauls.-Greek and Phaenician Colonies of Gaul and Spain .--Nations of Illyricum.--Of Greece.--- Achsean League.--Thebans.-Athenianls.-Afatic Nations.-Pergamuls.--Syria.-Egypt.-Carthage. -'he Matmertines of Mefina.-Occafion of the sir War with Carthage.-Loffes of the Parties.- Peace.-State of the Romanas.-Political or Civil Inftitutions.--Colonies.--MuJferss.-Operation on the Coin.-Increafe of the Slaves.-Gladiators.- Different Re flts of the PWar at Rome and Carthage. -Mutiny and Invasion of the Mercenaries at Car- thage.-End of this Jar.-Ceflon of Sardinia.- ar with the Illyrians.-Fifit Correspondence of Rome with Greece. the Romans, at the time to which our last A  [A observations refer, were become the fove- _ . ,~ reigns of Italy, or, by their ascendant info pow  4s8. erful a country, were enabled to act a distinguished part among the nations around it; it is proper in this place to carry our observations beyond the boundaries of that Peninsula, and enumerate the powers that were then eftab'ifhed on different fides of it, or beyond the narrow seas by which it was- surrounded.
Italy was not then supposed to comprehend the whole of that trat which has in later times been known under this name. Being bounded, as at present, on the South and Ealt by the seas of Sicily and the bay of Tarentum, it extended no further to the North-west than to the Arnus on the one hand, and to the Rubicon on the other. Beyond
lhclfe o these limits the western coafis were inhabited by a , number of tribes, which, under the name of Ligu-
rians, occupied the descents of the Appenines and the South of the Alps quite to the sea-shore. On the other of the Appenines, from Senegallia to the Alps, the rich and extensive plains on both fides of the Po were in the poffe4iion of Gaulish nations, wvho were said, some centuries before, to have pas- fed the mountains, and who were then actually spread over a fertile trat of more than twelve hundred miles in circumference. They consisted of nine different hordes, that were supposed to have pased the Alps at different times. Of there the Laulebecii, Infubres, Cenomani, and Veneti occu- pied the northern banks of the Po, including what are now the states of Milan, Venice, and other parts of Lombardy on that of the river. The Anianes, Boii, -Egones, and Senones, were fettled to the southward, from the Po to the descents of the Appenines, and on the coafis of the Hadriatic to Senegallia, over what are now the states of Par- ma, Modena, Bologna, and Urbino. In this favour- able fituaticn they appear to have abated much of their native ferocity, though without acquiring, in any considerable degree, the arts that improve the conveniencies of life. They fed chiefly on the milk or the flesh of their cattle, and were occupied en- tirely in the care of their arms and of their herds. By these, and the ornaments of gold, of which they were extremely fond, they efimated their riches. They wele divided into Tribes or Cantons, and lived in cottages huddled together, without any form'of towns or of villages. The leader of every horde was distinguished by his retinue, and valued himself chiefly on the number of his followers. They had made frequent encroachments on the fiates of Etruria and Umbria, but were met at last, and flopped in their progress, by the Romans. Such of them as were fettled within the Rubicon,
and
and fromi thence to- Senegallia, had, about threec A  years before the arrival of Pyrrhus in Italy, been obliged to acknowledge the authority of the Roman State (a).
The coafis of the Mediterranean, to the wePt- ward of Italy, had been known to the nations of Greece and of Asia, and had received many colo- nies from. thence, which formed trading settlements, and remained altogether distinct from the natives. Such were the Greek colonies at Marseilles, Empo- ria, Saguntum, and the Tyrian colony at Gades on the coafl of the ocean. On the other of Italy, and round the Hadriatic, were fettled a number of small nations, the Iftrians, Dalmatians, and Illyri- ans; of which, at the time when the Romans came acquainied with the navigation of this gulf, the Illyrians, being the chief or principal power, extended eaitward to the confines of Macedonia.
Alexander the Great had finithed the career ofu.  411. his victories about sixty years before this date. His hereditary dominions, as well as his personal quests, were dismembered, and become the patri- mony of officers, who had learned under him to affect the majesty and the power of kings. Mace- donia was governed by Antigonus Dozon, who, together with the principality of Pella, held under his dependence Epirus, Thessaly, and Greece, to the isthmus of Corinth. He had contended with with Pyrrhus, the late invader of Italy, for part of this territory ; and, by the death of this adventurer, was now in possession of the whole.
On one part of the coast of the lonian Sea, and on the Gulf of Corinth, were fettled the Etolians, who, during the prosperity of Greece, had been an obscure and barbarous horde; but had now, by lth confederacy of a number of cantons, laid many diffrits around them under contribution, and acfed
  Polyb.    17. 19. z9.
a diflin- o a distinguished part in the wars and tranfaaions that followed. '-/- On the other of the Gulf of Corinth a fimi-
lar confederacy was formed by the Achean league. The name of Achaa, in the fabulous ages, was the moli general denomination of Greeks. When other names, of Dorians and Ionians, of Athenians and Spartans, became more diftinguilhed, the name of Achaans was appropriated to the tribes who occu- pied the sea-coast, or the Gulf of Corinth, from Elis to Sicyon. On this tract twelve little cantons, Dymae, Phara, Tritaea, Rhipes, Thafium, Patra, Pellene, )Egium, Bura, Carynia, Olenos, and Hellice , having changed their government from principalities to republics, formed themselves into a league for their common defence. Hellice had been, from time immemorial, the feat of their as- fembly; but this place having been overwhelmed by an inundation of the sea, their meetings were transferred to IEgium.
In the more famous times of Sparta, Athens, and Thebes, these little cantons being situated on a poor and rocky Ihore, without shipping and without har- bours  , were of no consideration in the hiltory of Greece; they took no part in the defence of that country from the invasions of Darius, or of Xerxes, or in the divisions that followed under the hofiile banners of Sparta and of Athens. They began, however, to appear in support of the liber- ties of Greece against Philip the father of Alexan- der, and partook with the other Greeks in the  feat which they received from that prince at Cha- ronea, and in all its consequences. Their league was accordingly difiolved by the conqueror, and some of their cantons Separately annexed to the Macedonian monarchy. But about the time that Pyrrhus invaded Italy, Dyma, Patr:, Phara, and
;a, nfa-Liu,   .   6.   Phutarch, in Vit. Arat.  321.
Tritxa
Tritxa found an opportunity to renew their ancientc A  confederacy. They were joined in about five  years afterwards by :the canton of 2Egium, and fuc-  ceflively by those of Bura and Carynia. These, during a period of about twenty years, continued to be the only parties in this famous league. They had a general congress, at which they originally eleaed two annual officers of fate, and a mon secretary. They afterwards committed the executive power to one officer; and, under the famous Aratus of Sicyon, united that republic, together with Corinth and Megara, to their league  .
About the time when the Romans became maf- ters of Tarentum, this combination was become the most considerable power of the Peloponnefus, and affected to unite the whole of it under their banners; but Sparta, though greatly fallen from the splendor of her ancient discipline and power, was fill too proud, or too much under the direti- on of her ambitious leaders, to susser herself to be absorbed in this upstart confederacy; ihe conti- nued for rome time its rival, and was at last the cause, or furnished the occasion, of its fall.
The Thebans and Athenians, though still tending to the dignity of independent nations, were greatly reduced, and ready to become the prey of any party that was sufficiently powerful to reach them, by breaking through the other barriers that were itill opposed to the conquest of Greece.
In Asia, a considerable principality was formed round the city of Pergamus, and bore its name. Syria was become a mighty kingdom, extending from the coafis of lonia to Armenia and Peria. This kingdom had been formed by Seleucus Nicanor, a principal officer in the army of Alex-
  Polyb.    3. and PaufauiaE,  
ander, ander, and it was now in the possession of his son, Antiochus Sorer.
Egypt, in the fame manner, had passed from the first Ptolemy to his son Philadelphus, who, upon the expulsion of Pyrrhus from Italy, had entered into a correspondence with the Romans. This kingdom included the island of Cyprus, and, having some provinces on the continent of Asia, extended from Celo-Syria, of which the dominion was still in contest with Antiochus, to the defarts of Lybiat on the weft and on the south. Beyond these defarts, and almost opposite to the island of Sicily, lay the famous republic of Carthage, which was now poffefied of a considerable territory, fur- rounded by the petty African monarchies, out of hich the great kingdom of Numidia was after- vwards formed.
The city of Carthage is said to have been found- about a hundred years earlier than Rome, and was now unqueflionably farther advanced in the commercial and lucrative arts, and superior in every resource to Rome, besides that which is derived from the national character, and which is the confe- quence of public virtue.
In respect to mere form, the constitution of both nations was nearly alike. They had a senate and popular assemblies, and annually elected two offi- cers of state for the supreme direction of their civil and military affairs  ; and even at Carthage the departments of state were so fortunately balan- ced, as to have flood for ages the shock of corrupt factions, without having suffered any fatal revolu-  or without falling into either extreme of anar- chy or tyrannical ufiirpation. The frequent prof- pedt indeed, which the Carthaginians had, of curring there evils, joined to the influence of a bar- barous superstition, which represented the gods as
I') AriRob. lit.    tl.
delighted
delighted with human sacrifices, probably rendered A  their government in so high a degree inhuman and  cruel. Under the sanguinary policy of this slate, officers were adjudged, for miflakes or want of ca- pacity, as well as for crimes, to expire on the cross, or were condemned to some other horrible punish- ment equally odious and unjuti  .
The Carthaginians being like Tyre, of which they were supposed to be a colony, fettled on a peninsula, and at firit without sufficient land or ter- ritory, to maintain any considerable numbers of people, they applied themselves to such arts as might procure a subsistence from abroad; and came, upon the deftru&ion of Tyre, the principal merchants and carriers to all the nations inhabiting the coafis of the Mediterranean Sea. Their fitua-  so convenient for shipping, was extremely fa- vourable to this pursuit; and their success in it soon put them in poffeflion of a territory by which they became a landed as well as a naval power. They visited Spain, under pretence of giving support and afliftance to the city of Gades, which, like them- selves, was a colony from Tyre. They became maflers of Sardinia, and had considerable poffeffi- ons in Sicily, of which they were extremely desirous to seize the whole. From every part of their ac- quifitions they endeavoured to derive the profit of merchants, as well as the revenue of sovereigns.
In this republic, individuals had amassed great fortunes, and eitimated rank by their wealth. A certain estate was requisite to qualify any citizen for the higher offices of slate; and, in the canvas for elections, every preferment, whether civil or mili- tary, was venal  . Ambition itself, therefore, became a principle of avarice, and every Cartha- ginian, in order to be great, was intent to be rich. Though the interefis of commerce should have   Orofius,    6.   Polyb.    54.
culcated Oo culcated the desire of peace, yet the-inflience of a
i__ - few leading men in the fiate, and even the spirit of
rapacity which pervaded the people, the necessity to which they were often reduced' of providing set- tlements abroad for a populace who could not be easily governed at home, led them frequently into foreign wars, and even engaged them in projects of conquest. But notwithstanding this circum- liance, the community stifled or neglected the mi. litare character of their own citizens, and had per- petual recourse to foreigners, whom they trusted with their arms, and made the guardians of their wealth. Their armies, for the most part, were composed of Numidians, Mauritanians, Spaniards, Gauls, and fugitive slaves from every country around them. They were among the few nations of the world who had the ingenuity, or rather the misfortune, to make war without becoming mili- tary, and who could be victorious abroad, while they were exposed to be a prey to the meanest rader at home.
Under this wretched policy, however, the first offices or trufi and command being reserved for the natives, though the character of the people in ge- neral was mean and illiberal, yet a few, being  scended of those who had enjoyed the higher ho- nours of the fiate, inherited the characters of fiatef- men and warriors; and, instead of suffering by the contagion of mercenary chara&ers, they derived tome additional elevation of mind from the traft of manners they were taught to despise. And thus, though the State, in general, was degene- rate, a few of its members were qualified for great affairs. War, and the other objects of state, natu- rally devolved on such men, and occasionally ren- dered them necessary to a sedentary or corrupted people, who, in ordinary times, were disposed to flight their abilities, or to difiruft their power. 1 hey became unfortunately a party for war in the
councils
councils of their country, as those who were jealous A  of them became, with fiill less advantage to the public, a party for peace; or, when at war, a party who endeavoured to embarrass the condu of it; and, under the effe of misfortune, were ever ready to purchase tranquillity by the most shame- ful and dangerous conceflions.
Carthage being mistress of the sea, was already long known on the coasts of Italy: she had treaties subsisting with the Romans above two hundred years, in which they mutually fettled the limits of their navigation, and the regulations of their trade. And the Romans, as parties in these treaties, ap- pear to have had intercourse with foreign nati- ons by sea, earlier than is stated in the other parts of their history.
In the first of those treaties, which is dated in  244. the consulate of  Junius Brutus and  Hora- tius, the firit year of the commonwealth, the Ro- mans engaged not to advance on the coast of Africa,. unless they were forced by an enemy, or by firess of weather, beyond the Fair Promontory, which lay about twenty leagues to the westward of the Bay of Carthage.
It was agreed, that, even in these circumstances, they should remain no longer than five days, and supply themselves only with what might be necef- fary to refit their veflels, or to furnish them with victims for the usual sacrifices performed at sea. But that in Sardinia, and even in Africa, to the weft of this boundary, they should be at liberty to trade and to dispose of their merchandize without paying any duties besides the fees of the crier and clerk of sale; and that the public faith should be pledged for the payment of the price of all goods fold under the infpeEtion of there officers.
That the ports of Sicily should be equally open to both nations.
That
-. o That the Carthaginians, on their part, should not commit any hostilities on the coast of Latium,
nor moieft the inhabitants of Ardaea, Antium, Lau. rentium, Circeii, Terracina, or of any other place in alliance with the Romans; that they should not attempt to ere any fortress on that coast; and that, if they should land at any time with an armed force, they should not, upon any account what- ever, remain a night on shore.
By a subsequent treaty, in which the flates of Utica and Tyre are comprehended as allies to both parties, the former articles are renewed with addi- tional limitations to the navigation and trade of the Romans, and with some extension to that of the Carthaginians. The latter, for instance, are per- mitted to trade on the coast of Latium, and even to plunder the natives, provided they put the Ro- mans in poffefiion of any firong-holds they should seize on shore; and provided they should release, without ransom, such of the allies of the Romans as became their prisoners.   474. Upon the arrival of Pyrrhus in Italy, with an ar-
mament which equally alarmed both nations, the Romans and Carthaginians again renewed their treaties with an additional article, in which they agreed mutually to support each other against the designs of that prince, and not to enter into any separate treaty with him inconsistent with this  fenfive alliance: and further fiipulated, that, in the wars which were expe with this enemy, the Carthaginians, whether as principals or auxiliaries, should furnith the whole shipping, both transports and armed gallies; but that the expence of every armament fnould be defrayed at the charge of that party in whose behalf it was employed  .
In oblervance probably of the last of these trea- ties, and by mutual concert, though with confider-
(,') ,'',lb. !Ib. iii  3.
able
rablejealoufy and distrust of each other, the forcesc A  of there nations combined in reducing the garrison i. which Pyrrhus had left at Tarentum. Each had their separate designs on the place; and when its fate was determined, from thenceforward confi- dered the.other as their molt dangerous rival for dominion and power. Pyrrhus, even when they were joined in alliance against himself, .is said to have foreseen their quarrels, and to have pointed at the island of Sicily as the first scene of their test.
The Carthaginians were already in poffeflion of Lylibaeum, and of other pofls on this island, and had a design on the whole. The Romans were in fight of it; and, by their poffeflion of Rhegium, commanded one of the Straits. The other was occupied by the Mamertines, a race of Italian extraaion, who; beirig placed at Messina by the kingof Syracufe.to defend that fRation, bar- baroufly niurdered the.citizens, and took poffeflion of their habitations and effecs.
This horrid ation was; afterwards imitated by a Roman legion p6fRed at Rhegium during the late wars in Italy; these likewlfe murdered their hosts, and seized their poffeflions; but were punished by the Romans,. for this a& of cruelty and treachery~ with the moll exemplary rigour... They. were. duted. in chains to Rome, fcourged, and behead- by fifties at a time. 'he crime' of the Mamer- tines was resented by the Sicilians in general with a like indignation; and the authors-of it were pursued by Hiero ling of Syraoufe in particular, with a ge- nerous and heroic revenge. They were, at length, reduced, to' such! diitrefs,.;that they were resolved to surrend'er themselves to the firt power that could afford them, protection. ,But', ibeing divided in their choice, one party made A .offer:of their fubmifion to the Carthaginians, the other to the Romans. The latter scrupled to protea a- crime of which  I. they o they had so lately punished an example in their
. own people (i). And, while they hesitated on the -'proposal, the Carthagini'ans, favoured by the "
"lay of their rivals, and by the neighbourhood of their military fiations, got the rart of their petitors, and were received into the town of Messina."
"This unexpeted advantage gained by a power of which they were jealous, and the danger of sus- fering a rival to command the passage of the Straits, removed the scruples of the Romans; and the ofli- cer who commanded their forces in the contiguous parts of Italy, had orders to assemble all the ship- ping that could be found on the coast from Taren- tum to Naples, to pats with his army into Sicily, and endeavour to dispossess the Carthaginians from the city of Meflina."
"As soon as this officer appeared in the road with a force so much superior to that of his rivals, the party in the city, that favoured the admission of the Romans, took arms, and forced the Carthaginians to evacuate the place  ."
"Here commenced the sirs Punic war, about ten years after the departure of Pyrrhus from Italy, eight years after the surrender of Tarentum, and in the four hundred and ninetieth year of Rome. In this war, the firfi object of either party was no more than to secure the possession of Messina, and to command the passage of the Straits which fe- parate Italy from Sicily; but their views were gra- dually extended to obje of more importance, to the sovereignty of that island, arid the dominion of the seas."
"The contest between.them'was likely to. be ex. remely unequal. -On the one appeared the re' sources of a great nation, colleced from extensive dominions, a great naval force, fianding armies,"
"() Polyb, ib. i.   (A)   i.   "
"and"
"and the experience of diftartt operatiots. On 'thed  A  other, the ferocity or valour of a small State, hi-  therto exerted only against their rieighbours' of Italy, who, though subdued, were-averfe to subjec-  and in no condition to furnish the necessary supplies for a distant war.; without commerce or  venue, without any army but what was annually formed by detachments from the people,.and with- out any officers besides the ordinary magiltrates of the city; in short, without any naval force, or ex- perience of naval or distant operations. .-i :: . :-"
"Notwithlsanding thefe-unpromifing .appearances on the of the Romans, the commanding afpeEt of their first descent upon Sicily procnred::them not only the poffeflion of Meflina, but soon after deter- mined Hiero, the king of Syracuse, hithertoiin al1 liance with the Carthaginians, to efpoUfe':their cause, to supply their army with provifiohs; and afterwards to join them with his own. Being thus reinforced by the natives of Sicily, they were en- abled to recal part of the- force with which they began the war; continued, though at a less ex- pence, to aft on the offensive; and drove.the Car- thaginians from many of their important stations in the island (1)."
"While the arms of the Romans and of Hiero were victorious on shore, the Carthaginians conti- nued to be masters of the Tea, kept possession of all the harbours in Sicily, overawed the coafis, ob- ftruCted the military convoys from Italy, and alarmed that country itself with frequent defeents; It was evident, that, under these disadvantages, the Romans could neither make nor preserve any ma- ritime acquisitions; and it was necessary, either.to drop the contest in yielding the sea, or to endea- vour, on that element likewise, to cope with their rival. -Though not altogether, as historians repre-"
"(/)-Polyb.  i."
"H 2 lent"
"B 0 sent them, unacquainted with (hipping, they were"
", certainly inferior to the Carthaginians in the art of navigation, and altogether unprovided with ships of force. Fortunately for them, neither the art of failing, nor that of conftruting (hips, was yet ar- rived at such a degree of perfection as not to be easily imitated by nations who had any experience or practice of the sea. Vessels of the belt ftrution that was then known were fit to be navi- gated only with oars, or in a fair wind and on a smooth sea. They might be built of green tim- ber; and, in cafe of a itorm, could run ashore un- der any cover, or upon any beach that was clear of rocks. Such ships as there the Romans, without hesitation, undertook to provide. Having a Car- thaginian galley accidentally itranded at Messina for a model, it is said, that, in sixty days from the time that the timber was cut down, they fitted out and manned for the sea one hundred gallies of five tier of oars, and twenty of three tier. Vessels of the firit of there rates carried three hundred rowers, and two hundred fighting men."
"The manner of applying their oars from so many tiers, and a much greater number which they sometimes employed, has justly appeared a great difficulty to the mechanics and antiquari- ans of modern times, and is confessedly not well underfiood."
"The Romans, while their gallies were building, trained their rowers to the oar on benches that were erected on the beach, and placed in the form of those of the real galley (mi). Being sensible that the enemy muit be itill greatly superior in the manage- ment of their ships and in the quickness of their motions, they endeavoured to deprive them of this advantage, by preparing to grapple, and to bind their vessels together. In this condition the men"
"(in) Polyb.  i.  toi It."
"might"
"might engage on equal termts, fight from their A  fitaes or decks as on solid ground, and the.  Roman buckler and sword have the faime effeEt as oi shore."
"With an armament so conitriited, fill inferior to the enemy, and even unfortunate in its firit at- tempts, they learned, by perseverance, to vanquish the matters of the Tea oi their own element; and not only proteced the coafls of Italy, and sup- potted their operations in Sicily, but, with a pow- erful fleet of three hundred and thirty fail, overcame at Tea a superior number of the enemy, and carried the war to the gates of Carthage  ."
"On this occasion took place the famous adven- ture of Regulus; who being successful in his first operations, gave the Romans rome hopes of quest in Africa: but they were checked at once by the defeat of their army, and the captivity of theiru.  491. general. This event removed the feat of the war again into Sicily; and the Romans, fiill endea- vouritig to maintain a naval. force, fuffeied so many lofles, and incurred so many difalfers by storms, that they were, during a certain period of the wat, disgusted with the service at sea, and seemed to drop all pretensions to power on this element. The experience of a few years, however, while they endeavoured to continue their operations by land without any support from the sea, made them sensible of the necelfity they were under of storing their (hipping; and they did so with a solution and vigour which enabled them once more to prevail over the superior skill and experience of their enemy."
"In this ruinous conteit both parties made the ut- noft efforts, and the most uninterrupted exertion of their forces. Taking the forces of both fides, in one naval engagement, five hundred gallies of five"
"  Polyb. lb. i.  17."
"tier"
"B tier of oars, with two hundred and fifty thousand"
"men, and in another, seven hundred gallies, with three hundred and fifty thousand men, were brought into action  ; and in the course of there iiruggles the Romans loft, either by tempelts or by the hands of the enemy, seven hundred gallies; their antagonifis, about five hundred  . In the result of there detructive encounters, the Cartha- ginians, beginning to balance the inconveniencies which attended' the continuance of war against the concessions that were necessary to obtain peace, '  :. came to a resolution to accept of the following"
"terms:"
"That they should evacuate Sicily, and all the islands from thence to Africa:"
"That they should not for the future make war on Hiero king of Syracuse, nor on any of his allies:"
"That they should release all Roman captives without any raniom:"
"And within twenty years pay to the Romans a lum of three thousand Euboic talents (q)."
"Thus the Romans, in the result of a war, which wvas the firfi they undertook beyond the limits of Italy, entered on the poffeflion of all that the Carthaginians held in the islands for which they tended; and, by a continuation of the fame policy which they had so successfully pursued in Italy, by applying to their new acquisitions, instead of the alarming denomination of Subject, the softer name of Ally, they brought Hiero, who was sovereign of the greater part of Sicily, into a irate of dependence on themselves."
"Their manners, as well as their fortunes, were a perfect contrast to those of the enemy they had vanquilhed. Among the Romans, riches were of no account in constituting rank. Men became"
"(i) Po!yb.  i.  26.     63. (q)   62,  "
"eminent"
"eminent by rendering signal services to their coun- A  try, not by accumulating wealth. Persons of the  firfi distinction subsisted. in the capacity of husband- men by their own labour; and, with the fortunes of peasants, role to the command of armies, and the first offices of State. One Consul, of the name of Regulus, was found, by the officer who came to announce his election, equipped with the sheet or the basket, and sowing the feed of his corn in the field. Another, better known, of the fame name, while he commanded in Africa, desired to be recalled, in order to replace the infsruments of husbandry, which, to the great distress of his fa- mily, and the hazard of their wanting food, a fu- gitive slave had carried off from his land. The Senate refused his requefi, but ordered the farm of their general to be tilled at the public ex- pence (I)."
"The association of pomp and equipage with-rank and authority, it may be thought, is accidental, and only serves to difirat the attention which man- kind owe to personal qualities. It nevertheless ap- pears to be in some measure unavoidable. Superio- rity is difRinguifhed, even in the rudeRt nations, by some external mark. Duillius had his piper and his torch, in honour of the first naval victory ob- tained by his country  ; and the Romans ac- knowledged the external ensigns of Rate, although they were flill rude in the choice of them."
"At this time, when the nation emerged with so much lufire beyond the boundaries of Italy, the parties which divided the State, and whose animo- fity Sharpened so much the pangs which preceded the birth of many of its public establishments, had no longer any objec of contest. The officers of   Valer. Maxim.    4.  Epitom.  xviii. Seneca Albilnam.  li. Au&tor verfibus illu!tribus.    ELpitom.  xvii. xviii."
"State"
"B State were taken promiscuously froin either class of i_ , the people, and the diffinaion of Plebeian and"
"Patrician had in a great measure loft its effect. A happier species of aristocracy began to arise from the lufire of personal qualities, and the honours of family, which devolved upon those who were  scended from citizens who had borne the higher offi- ces of Sta':, and were distinguished in their coun- try service."
"The different orders of men in the common- wealth having obtained the infiitutions for which they severally contended, the number of oficers was increased, for the better adminiitration of as- fairs, which were fast accumulating. Thus a fe- cond Prator was added to the original eiablifh- ment of this office ; and, as the persons who held it were destined to at either in a civil or military capacity, to hear causes in the city, or to command armies in the field. They were affiited in the first of there functions by a new inflitution, that of the Centumvirs, or the Hundred, who vyere draughted from the Tribes, and appointed, during the year of their nomination, under the dire of the Prxtors, to take cognizance of civil disputes. The number of Tribes being now completed to thirty-five, and three of the Centumvirs being draughted from each, made the whole amount to a hundred and five  ."
"The city, during the late defiruaive war, sent abroad two colonies, one to Cafirum Innui, a vil- lage of the Latins, the other to Firmium in the Picenum, on the opposite of the peninsula, intended rather to guard and protet the'coaft, than to provide for any superabundance of the peo- ple, whome numbers at this time underwent a con-"
"(:)  Epitom.  xx."
"fiderable"
"fiderable diminution  ; the rolls having decreased A  in the course of five years, from two hundred and  ninety-feven thousand two hundred and twenty- seven, to two hundred and fifty-one thousand two hundred and twenty-two  . The revenue, to which citizens who were accuiomed to pay with their personal service, had little to spare from their effets, and which was at all times probably scanty, being often exhausted by the expences of the late war, brought the community under the neceflity of acquitting itself of its debts, by diminishing the weight, or railing the current value of its coin. The ass, which was the ordinary measure of valua-  being the libra, or pound of copper fiamped, and hitherto containing twelve ounces, was reduced in its weight to two ounces  ."
"The contribution now exaAted from Carthage amounting to about two hundred and feventy-nine thousand pounds, together with the rents to be col- le in Sicily, were likely to be great acceflions of wealth to such a State. The spoils of their enemies, for the most part, consisted of prisoners who were detained by the captor as his slaves, or sent to market to be fold. They had made a prize of twenty thousand captives in their first descent upon Africa and the number of saves in Italy was already become so great as to endanger the State  . (a) Livy, In different places, mentions between thirty and forty Roman colonies fubfiling in Italy in the time of the second Punic war    xxvii.  9 & 3.). Velleius Paterculus reckons about forty planted in Italy after the recovery of Rome from its deltrudion by the Gauls   i.  ). And Sigonius, colle the names of all tdhcolonies mentioned by say Rcman writer as planted in Italy, has made a lift of about ninety. But this matter, which so much interelts this very learned antiquarian and many others, was become, as we have mentioned, a fubjcft of mere cu- rifity, even in'the times of the writers from whom our accounts are col- leccd; as all the Italians were by that time admitted on the roll of Roman citizens by the law of  Julius Cafar, and in consequence of the MarGc war.  663.    Epitom.  xix.   Plin Hill. Nat.  xxxiii.   (a) Zonar.   Orofiuc,  i.  7."
"The"
"a o The favourite entertainments of the People were"
"combats of armed slaves, known by the name of gladiators, derived from the weapons with which they most frequently fought. Such exhibitions, it is said, were first introduced in the interval between the first and second Punic war, by a son of the family of Brutus, to solemnize the funeral of his father. Though calculated rather to move pity and cause horror, than to give pleasure; yet, like all other scenes which excite hopes and fears, and keep the mind in fufpence, they were admired by the multitude, and became frequent on all solemn oc- cafions or festivals."
"In the circumstances or events which immediately followed thl peace between Rome and. Carthage, those nations shewed the different tendency of their institutions and manners. The Romans, in the very Itruggles of a seemingly destructive contest, had acquired firength and security, not only by the reputation of great victories; but fiill more by the military spirit and improved discipline and skill of their people by sea and by land. Although their subjects in Italy revolted, and their allies with- drew their support, yet both were soon reduced, at the first appearance of those veteran soldiers who had been formed in the service of the preceding wvar."
"The Carthaginians, on the contrary, had made war above twenty years without becoming more warlike; had exhaufied their resources, and fumed the bread of their own people in maintaining foreign mercenaries, who, inltead of being an ac- cejiion of strength, were ready to prey on their weakness, and to become the most formidable ene- mies to the slate they had served. Their army, composed, as usual, of hirelings from Gaul, Spain, and the interior parts of Africa, estimated their ser- vices in the war which was then concluded at a higher value than the State was dilpofed to allow,"
"and"
"gnd attempted to take by force what was refused toc A  their representations and claims. Being assembled  in the neighbourhood of Carthage to receive the arrears of their pay, the Senate wildly proposed, in consideration of the difireffed condition of the pub- lic revenue, that they should make some abatement of the fums that were due to them. But the State, instead of obtaining the abatements which were thus proposed, only provoked men with arms in their hands to enter into altercations, and to mul- tiply their claims and pretensions. The mercena- ries took offence at the delays of payment, rose in their demands upon every conceflion, and marched at last to the capital, with all the appearances and threats of an open and victorious enemy. They ilfued a proclamation on their march, inviting all the provincial fubjets of the commonwealth to as- fert their freedom, and, by the numbers that flocked to them from every quarter, became a mighty host, to which the city had nothing to op- pose but its walls. To effeduate the reduction of Carthage, they invested Tunis and Utica, and submitted to all the discipline of war from the officers whom they themselves had appointed to command."
"In this crisis, the republic of Carthage, cut off from all its resources and ordinary supplies, attack- with that very sword on which it relied for  fence, and in a situation extremely deplorable and dangerous, having still some confidence in the abi- lity of their Senators, and in the magnanimity of officers tried and experienced in arduous and peri- lous situations, was not altogether reduced to  fpair. Although the people had committed their arms into the hands of strangers, the command of armies had been fill reserved to their own citizens; and now, by the presence and abilities of a few great men, they were taught to alrume a necessary courage, to put themselves in a military posture,"
"and"
"F and to maintain, during three years, and through a"
". scene of mutual cruelties and retaliations, unheard"
"of in the contests of nations 'at war, a struggle of the greatefi difficulty. In this firuggle they vailed at last by the total extirpation of this vile and ou.rageous enemy (a)."
"During the dependence of this odious revolt, in which a mercenary army endeavoured to subdue the State which employed them, the Romans served that character for generosity and magnani- rnity of which they knew so well how to avail them- selves, without losing any opportunity that offered for the secure advancement of their power. They refrained from giving any countenance even againfi their rival to such unworthy antagonifis. They affeced to disdain taking any advantage of the present difireffes of Carthage, and refused to enter into any correspondence with a part of the rebel mercenaries, who, being Rfationed in Sardinia, of- sered to surrender that island into their hands. They prohibited the traders of Italy to furnish the rebels with any supply of provisions or stores, and abandoned every vessel that presumed to transgress there orders, to the mercy of the Carthaginian crui- sers which plied before the harbours of Tunis and Utica. Above five hundred Roman prisoners, feiz- by there cruizers, were detained in the jails of Carthage. At the termination, however, of thi, war, when the Carthaginians were far from being diipofed to renew any quarrel whatever, the Ro- mans fixed on this as a ground of dispute, corn plained of piracies committed against the traders ol Italy, under pretence of intercepting supplies to the rebels; and, by threatening immediate war upor this account, obtained from the State itself a fur- render of the island of Sardinia, which they had refused to accept from the rebels, and got an "
"(.) Polb.  i.  67.-fine."
"ditior"
"dition of two hundred talents to the fum fiipulatedc A i. in the late treaty of peace, to make up for their  tended lolles by the utppofed unwarrantable capture,' of their ships  ."
"Upon this surrender the Sardinians bore with some discontent the change of their sovereigns; and, on the first prohibition of their usual merce with Carthage, to which they had been long accustomed, took arms, and endeavoured for some time to withstand the orders which they were quired to obey."
"Soon after the Romans had reconciled these new acquired subje to their government, had quelled a revolt in Tuscany, and vanquished some can- tons of Liguria, whom it is said they brought to submit as fast as the access to that country could be opened, they found themselves at peace with all the world  ; and, in token of this memora- ble circumstance, shut the gates of the temple of Janus; a ceremony which the continual fuccellion of wars, from the reign of Numa to the present time, had prevented, during a period of four hun- dred and thirty years; a ceremony,which,when per- formed, marked a situation as transient as it was firange and uncommon."
"Frelh disturbances in some of the possessions recently seized by the republic, and a quarrel of some importance that carried her arms for the firit time beyond the Hadriatic, embroiled her anew in a fucceflion of wars and military  ventures."
"The Illyrians had become of late a confider- able nation, and were a party in the negotiations and quarrels of the Macedonians and the Greeks. Having convenient harbours and retreats for ship- ping, they carried on a piratical war with most (q) Polyb.  i.  88.  iii . xc . Appian Bell. Punic.  4.   Florus,   . 3. Eutrop.  "
"of"
"E of their neighbours, and, in particular, commit."
"ted depredations on the traders of Italy, which it concerned the Romans, as the sovereigns of this country, to prevent. They accordingly sent  puties to complain of there practices, to demand a reparation of past injuries, and a security from any such attempts for the future. The Illyrians at this time were under the government of Teuta, the widow of a king lately deceased, who held the reins of government as guardian to her son. This princess, in answer to the complaints and representations of the Romans, declared, that in her kingdom no public commiflion had ever been granted to make war on the Italians; but she ob- served, that the seas being open, no one could answer for what was tranfated there; and that it was not the cufRom of kings to debar their sub- jects from what they could seize by their valour. To this barbarous declaration one of the Roman deputies replied, that his country was ever go- verned by different maxims; that they endeavour- to restrain the crimes of private persons by the authority of the State, and (hould, in the present cafe, find a way to reform the pracice of kings in this particular. The queen was incensed; and 1enting there words, as an insult to herself, gave or- ders to waylay and affalfinate the Roman deputy on his return to Rome  ."
"In revenge of this barbarous outrage, and of the former injuries received from that quarter, the Remans made war on the queen of Illyricum, ob- liged her to make reparation for the injuries she had done to the traders of Italy, to evacuate all the towns (he had occupied on the coast, to restrain her subjects in the use of armed (hips, and to forbid them to navigate the Ionian Sea with more than tvwo veffies in company."
"  Polyb.    "
"The"
"The Romans, being desirous of having theirc A  conduct in this matter approved of by the nati-   ons of that continent, sent a copy of this treaty, together with an exposition of the motives which had induced them to cross the Adriatic, to be read in the assembly of the Achaean league. They soon after made a like communication at Athens and .at Corinth, where, in consideration of the signal service they had performed against the Illy- rians, then reputed the common enemy of civi- lized nations,:,they had an honorary place assigned them at the :fthmian games; and in this manner made their first appearance in the councils ofr.  5s. Greece  ."
"  Polyb.    ic. Appiaa in Illyr."
"CHAP."
"C A   Prcgrls of the Romans within the Alps.-Origin"
"of the fecord Punic rAar.-Mlarch of Hannibal iiito Italy.-Progrefs.-AElion on the fecinus.- On the Frebia.--On the Lake Thraflmenus.- Battle of Cannm.-Hannibal not flipported from Carhkag.-Sequel of the War.-In Italy.-And Africa.-Scipi9 Operations.-Battle of Zama.- Erin of the War. oo0 HE city of Rome, and most of the diftrits"
"T-^  of Italy, during the dependence of the lali enumerated wars which were waged at a distance and beyond the seas, began to experience that un. interrupted tranquillity in which the capital and in. terior divisions of every considerable nation remain. even during the wars in which the slate is engaged They had indeed one source of alarm on the sids of Cifailpine Gaul, which they thought it neceffar3 to remove, in order to obtain that entire security to which they aspired. The country of the Se nones, from Sena Gallia to the Rubicon, they hac already subdued, even before the arrival of Pyrrhu! in Itay ; but the richest and most fertile tracts or the Po were itill in the poffeflion of the Gaulifi rations; and it had been proposed, about fou years after the conclusion of the firit Punic war to erect a barrier against the invasions of this peo pie, by occupying with Roman colonies the coun try of the Senones, from Sena Gallia to the Rubi con. Although the inhabitants to be removes to make room for these settlements had beei fnbjet to the Romans above forty years, ye their brethren on the Po confidered this act c"
"violenc"
"violence as an insult to the Gaulish name, re A  solved to avenge it, and invited their country-  men from beyond the Alps to take part in the quarrel."
"In consequence of their negotiations and certs, in about eight years after the Romans were fettled on the Rubicon, a great army of Gauls ap- peared on the Roman frontier. These nations used to make war by impetuous assaults and invasions, and either at once subdued and occupied the coun- tries which they over-ran, or, being repulsed, abandoned them without any farther intention to perfiit in the war. Their tumultuary operations, however, were fubjets of the greatest alarm at Rome, and generally produced a suspension of all the ordinary forms of the commonwealth. On a profpe& of the present alarm from that quarter, the Senate, apprehending the necessity of great and sudden exertions of all their flrength, ordered a general account to be taken of all the men fit to carry arms, whether on foot or on horseback, that could be assembled for the defence of Italy; and they mustered, on this famous occasion, above seven hundred thousand foot and seventy thousand horse  . From this numerous return of men in arms, the State was enabled to make great detach- ments, which they Rtationed under the Consuls and one of the Prators separately, for the defence of the commonwealth. The Gauls, having pene- trated into Etruria, where the Prator was fiation-  attacked and obliged him to retire. The Consuls, however, being arrived with their several armies in different directions to support the Pra- tor, renewed the conflit with united force, and put the greater part of the Gaulish invaders to the sword."
"  Polyb.    2..-24,    Epitom.  xxi.  I. I In"
"B 0 In the year following, the Romans carried the"
"' war into the enemy country; and, in about three   .9.years more, passed the Po, and made themselves"
"matters of all the plains on that river quite to the foot of the Alps. To secure this valuable acquifi- they projected two colonies of fix thousand men each, one at Cremona and the other at Pla. centia, on the opposite fides of the Po; but were disturbed in the execution of this project, firit, by a revolt of the natives, whojuftly confidered there settlements as military fiations, intended to repress and keep themselves in subjection; and afterwards, by the arrival of a successful invader, who, by his conduEt and implacable animosity, appeared to be the moil formidable enemy that had ever attempted to ihake the power, or to limit the progress, of the Roman State."
"The republic had now enjoyed, during a period of twenty one years from the end of the firfr Punic war, the fruits not only of that ascendant she had acquired among the nations of Italy, but those likewise of the high reputation she had gained, and of the great military power she had formed in the contest with Carthage. The wars that filled up the interval of peace with this principal antagonist, were either trivial or of short duration: and the city itself, though still rude in the form of its buildings and in the manners of its people, probably now began to pay a growing attention to the arts ol peace. Laws are dated in this period which have a reference to manufacture and to trade. Clothier! are directed in the fabric of cloth  , and carrier! by water are directed in the size of their vessels  5'3.Livius Andronicus and Navius introduced some"
"'species of dramatic entertainment, and found a fa vourable reception from the people to their farcica productions  .   Lex Metilia Fulionibus. Lex Claudia. () Ciccr. in Brto,  35. A Gall.  xvii.  2a."
"Bu"
"But whatever progress the people were now in A  dined to make in the useful or pleasurable arts of vt peace, they were effectually interrupted, and ob- liged to bend the force of their genius, as in former times, to the arts of war, and to the defence of their settlements in Italy."
"The Carthaginians had been for some time em- ployed in Spain, making trial of their firength, and forming their armies. In that Country Hamilcar, an officer of diflinguifhed fame in the late war with the Romans, and in that which ensued with the rebel mercenaries, had fought refuge from that disgust and those mortifications which, in the late treaty of peace, he felt from the abject councils of his country. And having found a pretence to levy new armies, he made some acquisitions of terri- tory, to compensate the losses which Carthage had fultained by the surrender of Sardinia and of Sicily."
"Spain appears to have been to the trading na- tions of Greece, Asia, and Africa, what America has been, though upon a larger scale,, to the mo- dern nations of Europe, an open field for new set- tlements, plantations, and conquefis. The natives were brave, but impolitic, and ignorant of the arts of peace, occupied entirely with the care of their horses and their arms. These, fays an historian, they valued more than their blood (i). They paint- or stained their bodies, affected long hair with gaudy ornaments of silver and of gold. The men were averse to labour, and subsisted chiefly by the industry es their women. Their mountains abounded in mines of copper and of the precious metals; insomuch that, on some parts of the coast, it was reported that the natives had vessels and utensils of silver employed in the most common uses  . A fatal report ! such as that which after-"
"(i) Juftin,  xliv.  2.   Strabo,  iii."
"I wards"
"o 0 wards carried the posterity of this very people,"
"with so much deftrudtive avidity, to visit the new ~' world; and is ever likely to tempt the dangerous
visits of strangers, who are ready to gratify their avarice and their ambition, at the expence of nati- ons to whose poffeflions they have no reasonable or just pretension. The Spaniards were at this time divided into many barbarous hordes or finall prin- cipalities, which could neither form any effectual concert to prevent the intrusion and settlement of foreigners, nor poteffled the necessary docility by which to profit by foreign examples, whether in the form of their policy or the invention of arts.
The Carthaginians had made their first visits to Spain under pretence of supporting the colony of Gades, which, like themselves, was sprung from Tyre. They made a settlement under the name of new Carthage, in a situation extremely favour- able to the communication of Spain with Africa, and in the neighbourhood of the richest mines. Hamilcar, after a few successful campaigns, in extending the bounds of this settlement, being killed in battle, was succeeded by his fon-in-law, Hasdrubal, who continued for some years to pursue the fame designs.
The Romans, in the mean while, were occupied on the coast of lilyricum, or amused with alarms from Gaul. They were sensible of the progrefi made by their rivals in Spain; but imagining that any danger from that quarter was extremely mote, or while they had wars at once on both fidel of the Hadriatic, being unwilling to engage at the fame time with so many enemies, were content with a negotiation and a treaty, in which they fti pulated with the Carthaginians that they thoulc not pass the Iberus to the eastward, nor molest the city of Saguntum. This they confidered as proper barrier on that  and professed for tb
inhabitant
inhabitants of that place the concern of allies A  Trusting to the effec of this treaty, as sufficient  to limit the progress of the Carthaginians in Spain, they proceeded, in the manner that has been men- tioned, to contend with the Gauls for the domi- nion of Italy, which hitherto, under the frequent alarms they received from this people, was fill secure (1).
Hasdrubal, after nine years service, being as- faflinated by a Spanish slave, who committed this desperate action in revenge of an injury which had been done to his mafler, was succeeded in the command of the Carthaginian troops in Spain by Hannibal, the son of Hamilcar. This young man, tlln of five and twenty years of age, had, when a child  , come into Spain with his father, seem- to inherit his genius, and preserved, probably with increaling animosity, his aversion to the Ro- mans. Being reared and educated in camps, and from his earliest youth qualified to gain the confi- dence of soldiers, he, on the death of Hasdrubal, by the choice of the troops, was raised to the mand of that army, and afterwards confirmed in it by the Senate-of Carthage.
The Carthaginians had now for some time ceased to feel the defeats and the lufferings which had duced them to accept of the late disadvantageous conditions of peace, and were sensible only of the lasting inconveniencies to which that treaty expoled them. They had long felt, from the neighbour- hood of the Romans, an insurmountable bar to their progress. They had felt, during above seven- teen years from the date of their laii treaty of peace, the loss of their maritime settlements, and the  cline of their navigation. They had felt the load of a heavy contribution, which, though refirited to a particular fum, had the form of a tribute, in
(I) Polyb.   13. 1 () At nine years of age.
being 0 being exacted by annual payments; and they en.
_ tertained sentiments of animosity and aversion to
the Romans, which nothing but the memory of cent sufferings and the apprehension of danger could have so long suppressed.
Hamilcar) together with a considerable party of the Senate, were supposed to have borne with the late humiliating peace, only that they might have leisure to provide for a fublequent war.  I have  four sons, this famous warrior had been heard to fay,  whom I shall rear like so many lions  whelps againfi the Romans. In this spirit he set armies on foot to be trained and accuflomed to ser- vice in Spain, and had already projecred the inva- sion of Italy from thence.
Whatever may have been the military services which the Carthaginians devised, the execution of them was secured by the coming of Hannibal to the head of their army. He was well formed for great enterprise, and professed an hereditary aver- sion to the Romans. In the firfi and second year of his command he continued the operations which had been begun by his predecessors in Spain; but during this time, although he made conquests beyond the Iberus, he did not molest the city of Saguntum, nor give any umbrage to the Romans. Bur, in the third year after his appointment, his progress alarmed the Saguntines, and induced them to fend a deputation to Rome to impart their fears.
At the arrival of this deputation from Sagun. tum, the Romans had fitted out an armament un- der the command of the Consul  Emilius Paulus, defined to make war on Demetrius, the prince of Pharos, a small island on the coast of Illyricum. This armament, if directed to Spain, might have secured the city of Saguntum againit the designs of Hannibal; but the Romans flill confidered any danger from that quarter as remote, and continued
to
to employ this force in its first destination. Theyc A  paid so much regard, nevertheless, to the repre-. fentations of the Saguntines, as to fend deputies into Spain, with orders to observe the pofiure of affairs, and to inform the Carthaginian officer on that flation, of the engagements which had been entered into by his predecessor, and of the concern which the Romans must undoubtedly take in the (afety of Saguntum. The return which they had to this message gave sufficient intimation of an ap- proaching war; and it appears that, before the Roman commissioners could have made their port, the siege of Saguntum was actually menced by Hannibal. He had already formed his design for the invasion of Italy, and, that he might not leave to the Romans a place of arms and a powerful ally in the country from which he was about to depart, determined to occupy or destroy that place. He was impatient to reduce Sagun- tum before any succours could arrive from Italy, or before any force could be collected againfl him, so as to fix the theatre of the war in Spain. He pressed the siege, therefore, with great impetuosity, exposing his person in every assault; and exciting, by his own example, with the pickaxe and spade, the parties at work in making his approaches  . Though abundantly cautious not to expose himself on flight occasions, or from a mere oflentation of courage, yet in this siege, which was the founda- of his hopes, and the necessary prelude to the farther progress of his enterprize, he declined no fatigue, and ihunned no danger, that led to the at- tainment of his end. He was, nevertheless, by the valour of the besieged, which they exerted in hopes of relief from Rome, detained about eight months before this place, and deprived at lait of great part of its spoils by the desperate resolution of the citi- -) Polhb.  iii.  17.
zens, o Kzens, who chore to perish, with all their effe '
,_ rather than fall into the enemy hands. The   53-booty, however, which he saved from this wreck
enabled him, by his liberalities, to gain the affetion of his army, and to provide for the execution of his design against Italy.
The siege of Saguntum, being an infraction of the late treaty with the Romans, was undoubtedly an act of hostility; and this people incurred a cen- sure of remissness, uncommon in their councils, by suffering an ally, and a place of such impor- tance, to remain so long in danger, and by susser- it at last to fall a prey to their enemy, without making any attempt to relieve it, It is probable, that the security they began to derive from a fron- tier, far removed from the feat of their councils, and covered on every by the Tea, or by imper- vious mountains, rendered them more negligent than they had formerly been of much fighter alarms. They expected to govern by the dread of their power, and proposed to punish, by exemplary vengeance, the insults which they had not taken care to prevent.
The attention of the Romans, during the  pendence of this event, had been fixed on the set- tlements they were making at Cremona and Pla- centia, to keep in fubjetion the Gauls, and on the naval expedition which they had sent under the Consul iEmiiius to the coast of Illyricum. This cfficer, about the time that Hannibal had accom- plifhed his design on Saguntum, and was retired for the inter to his usual quarters at New Car- thage, had succeeded in his attack on Demetrius prince of Pharos, had driven him from his ter- ritories, and obliged him to seek for refuge at the court of Macedonia, where his intrigues proved to be of some consequence in the sequel of these trt .nladtions.
The
The people at Rome being amused with thefec A  events, and with a triumphal procefion, which, as - usual, announced their vitory, proceeded in the affairs of Spain according to the usual forms, and agreeably to the laws which they had, from time immemorial, prescribed to themselves in the cafe of injuries received, sent to demand satisfaction; complained at Carthage of the infiracion of trea- ties; and required that Hannibal with his army should be delivered up to their messengers; or, if this were refused, gave orders to denounce imme- diate war. The Roman commiflioner, who spoke to this effect in the senate of Carthage, having made his demands, held up the lappet of his gown, and said,  Here are both peace and war, chufe ye. -He was answered,  We chufe that which  you like best.- Then it is war, he faid   535. and from this time both parties prepared for the contest."
"Hannibal had been long devising the invasion of Italy, probably without communicating his design even to the councils of his own country. The war being now declared, he made his dispositions for the safety of Africa and Spain; gave intimation to the army under his command, that the Romans had required them to be delivered up, as a beast which commits a trespass is demanded in reparati- on for the damage he has done  . If they felt a proper resentment of this indignity, he warned them to prepare for an arduous march. He was in the eight and twentieth year of his age when he entered upon the execution of this design; an un- dertaking which, together with the conduct of it, has raised his reputation for enterprize and ability to an equal, if not to a higher pitch, than that of any leader of armies whatever.   Velut ob noxam fibi dedi pollularct populus Romanus.     30."
"The"
"n o The Romans, a few years before, had mustered"
"near eight hundred thousand men, to whom the use of arms was familiar, to whom valour was the most admired of the virtues, and who were ready to as- femble in any numbers proportioned to the service for which they might be required: the march from Spain into Italy lay across tremendous moun. tains, and through the territory of fierce and bar- barous nations, who might not be inclined tamely to susser a firanger to pass through their country, or lose any opportunity to enrich themselves with his spoils."
"From such topics as there, hifiorians have mag- nifed the courage of this celebrated warrior at the expence of his judgment. It is probable, how- ever, that both were equally exerted in this memo- rable service. In the contest of nations, that coun- try, which is made the feat of the war, for the most part labours under great comparative disadvantage, is obliged to subsist the army of its enemy as well as its own, is exposed to devastation, to hurry, confusion, and irresolution of councils; so much that, in nations powerful abroad, invasions often betray great incapacity and weakness, or at least fix the whole sufferings of the war upon those who are invaded. Hannibal, besides this general fideration, had with great care informed himfelfof the real frate of Italy, and knew, that though the Roman musters were formidable, yet much of their f3ppofed firength consisted of discordant parts; a number of separate cantons recently united, and any of them dilaffected to the power by which they were cemented together. Mofl of the inhabi- tants of that country, being the descendants of different nations, and-diftinguifhed by various lan- guages, still retained much animosity to each other, and mods of all to their new mafiers. Those who had longeii borne the appellation of Roman allies, even the colonies themnllves, as well as the con."
"quered"
"quered nations, had occasionally revolted, andc A  were likely to prefer separate establishments to their present dependance on the Roman State. The Gauls and Ligurians, even the Etruscans, had been recently at war with those supposed matters of Italy, and were ready to resume the sword in cert with any successful invader. The Gauls on the Po were already in arms, had razed the fortifi- cations which the Romans had begun to erect at Cremona and Placentia, and forced the settlers to take refuge at Mutina. Every ftep, therefore, that an invader should make within this country, was likely to remove a support from the Romans, and to add a new one to himself. The Roman power, composed of parts so ill cemented, was likely to dissolve on the slightest touch. Though great when employed at a diltance, and wielded by a tingle hand, yet broken and disjointed by the pretence of an enemy, it was likely to lose its firength ; or, by the revolt of one or more of its diitri6ts, might furnish a force that could be successfully employed against itself. A few itriking examples of success, therefore, for which he trusted to his own conduct, and to the superiority of veterans hardened in the service of many years, were likely to let loose the discontents which fublifled in Italy, and to flake the fidelity of those allies who composed so great a part of the Roman ilrength. Even with a less fa- vourable profped of success, the risk was but small, compared to the chance of gain. A single army was to be flaked against a mighty State; and a few men, that could be easily replaced, were to be sacrificed in an enterprize, which, if successful, was to make Carthage the mitrefs of the world ; or even if it should miscarry, might inflict her enemy with a deeper wound than she herself was likely to susser from the loss.
Hannibal collected together for this expedition ninety thousand foot and twelve thousand horse.
In
EO In his march to the Iberus, he met with no inter, ruption. From thence to the Pyrenees, being op- * '-apofed by the natives, he forced his way through
their country; but apprehending some inconveni- ence from such an enemy left in his rear, he fiati- oned his brother Hanno, with ten thousand foot and one thousand horse, to observe their motions, and to keep in awe. After he had begun to as- cend the Pyrenees, a considerable body of his Spa- nifh allies deserted him in the night, and fell back to their own country. This example, he had rea- son to believe, would prove contagious; and as the likeliest way to prevent its effects, he gave out, that the party which had left him, being no longer wanted for the purposes they served on the march, were returned by his orders to their own country. That he meant to spare a few more of the troops of the fame nation, as being unnecessary in the remaining parts of the service; and actually miffed a considerable body to confirm this opinion. By there separations, or by the swords of the enemy, his numbers, in descending the moun- tains, were reduced from ninety to fifty thousand foot and nine thousand horse, with seven and thirty elephants  .
This celebrated march took place in the year of   4c. -Rome five hundred and thirty-four, and in the fulate of Publius Cornelius Scipio and Tiberius Sempronius Longus. The Romans, as usual on such occasions, raised two consular armies, and posed, by immediate armaments directed to Spain 2nd to Africa, to fix the scene of the war in the ene- my country.
Sermproni afFemb an army and a fleet in the por of Sicily, and had orders to pass into Africa. Scipio embarked with some legions for Spain, and, * :'ching cn the coafi of Gaul, first learned, that a ) Polbb.  .  35-42.
Cartha-
Carthaginian army was marching by land intoc A  Italy. This intelligence determined him to land  his troops at Marseilles, and to fend out a detach- ment of horse to observe the country, and to cure farther and more particular information of the enemy.
Hannibal had arrived on the Rh6ne at some tance above its reparation into two channels, and about four days march from the sea. In order to effec the passage of the river, he instantly col- leted all the boats that could be found on its ex- tensive navigation. At the fame time, the na- fives, being unacquainted with firangers in any other capacity than that of enemies, assembled in great numbers to dispute his farther progress in their country.
Finding so powerful a resistance in front, he  layed the embarkation of his army on the Rh6ne, and sent a detachment up the banks of the river to pass it at a different place, and to make a diver- sion on the flank or the rear of the enemy who op- posed him.
The division employed on this service, after a march of twenty-five miles, found the Rh6ne fepa- rated into branches by small islands, and at a venient place got over on rafts to the opposite shore; and being thus in the rear, or on the right of the Gaulish army, hastened towards them, in order to give an alarm on that quarter while Hannibal should pass the river in their front.
On the fifth day after the departure of this party, Hannibal, having intelligence that they had succeeded in pafling the Rh6ne, made his difpofiti- on to profit by the diversion they were ordered to make in his favour. The larger vessels, which were defined to transport the cavalry, were rang- towards the fiream, to break the force of the current and many of the horses were faflened to the ilern of the boats. The smaller canoes
were
3 o were ranged below, and were to carry over a body
of foot. ~''- The Gauls, feeing these preparations, left their
camp, and advanced to meet the enemy. They were drawn up on the banks of the river, when the Carthaginian detachment arrived on their rear, and lighted fires as a signal of their approach. Hannibal observing the smoke, notwithfianding the posture which the enemy had taken to refifi his landing, inflantly put off from the (hore: both ar- mies shouted; but the Gauls being thrown into great consternation by the report and effe of an attack which they little expected on their rear, with- out resistance gave way to the Carthaginians in front, and were speedily routed. Hannibal, hav- thus lodged himself on the eafiern banks of the Rh6ne, in a few days, without any farther interruption or loss, passed that river with his elephants, baggage, and the remainder of his army.
Soon after the Carthaginian general had fur- mounted this difficulty, intelligence came that a Roman army had arrived on the coafi, and was disembarked at Marseilles. To gain further and more certain information of this enemy, he, nearly about the fame time that Scipio had sent a detach- ment on the fame design, direeted a party of horse to examine the country. These parties met; and, after a smart engagement, returned to their several armies with certain accounts of an enemy being near.
Scipio advanced with the utmost dispatch to fix the scene of the war in Gaul; and Hannibal haflen- his departure, being equally intent on removing it, if poflible, into Italy. The last, in order to keep clear of the enemy, directed his march at a tance from the sea coafi, and took his route by the banks of the Rh6ne. After four days march from .he place where he had passed this river, he came
to
to its confluence with another river, which was pro A  bably the Ifere, though by Polybius himself, who  visited the trac of this march, the place seems to be mistaken for the confluence of the Rh6ne and Saone (q). Here he found two brothers contend- for the throne of their father, and gained an useful ally by espousing the cause of the elder. Being, in return for this service, supplied with arms, shoes, and other necessaries, and attended by the prince himself, who with a numerous body covered his rear, he continued his march during ten days, probably on the Ifere, and about a hundred miles above the place where he had passed the Rh6ne, began to make his way over the summit of the Alps; a labour in which he was employed with his army during fifteen days  .
The (q) In the manuscripts of Polybius, the river which falls into the Rhane at this place was called by a name unknown in that country. The first editor, to corret the mistake, changed this unknown name for that of the Arar. But it is extremely probable, that they ought to have made it the Ifara, as the confluence of the Ifere and the Rhane corresponds much bet- ter with the distances and marches mentioned by Polybius. Four marches, for instance, from the place at which Hannibal had palsed the Rhdne, and four more from thence to the sea.   This famous route has been a subjet of different opinions, and of some controversy. In a country that is railed into vati mountains, round which the way mutl be found by narrow valleys, and the channels of ri- vers, it is impoflible to decide any question of this fort from the map. Po- lybius vificed the ground, in order to satisfy himself on the tract of this fa- mous route; and, from this circum(tance, as well as from his general knowledge of war, is undoubtedly the belt authority to whom we can have recourse in this question. By his account, Hannibal, after four marches from the place at which he had palsed the Rhsne, came to the confluence of this with another river, which is evidently the Ifere. From thence, having continued his route ten days on the river,and marched about a hund- red miles, he began to ascend the summit, and was employed in that diffi- cult work fifteen days. This account may incline us to believe, that Han- nibal followed the courfc of the Ifere from its confluence with the RhSne to about Conflans; that, having surmounted the summit, he descended to Italy by the channel of another river, or the Vale of Aolfe. such are the paf(agcs by which ridges of mountains, in every instance, are to be tra- versed. It is indeed affcrted, or implied in the text of Polybius, that Han- nibal marched ten days on the Rhone after its confluence with the lrar or Illra; but it is probable, that, in visiting a barbarous country, in whkh the Romans had yet no pofeflions, and with the language of which he was un- acquainted, he may have mitlaken the Ifere for the RhOne, and conl - quently the Rh6ne for the Arar or Saone. The RhBne and Ifere take their rife from the fame ridge, and run nearly in the fame directions, In this
account 0 The natives, either fearing him as an enemy, or
Ls ^ propoiing to plunder his baggage, had occupied
every post at which they could obftrut his march; assailed him from the heights, endeavoured to over- whelm his army in the gorges of the mountains, or force them over precipices, which frequently fink perpendicular under the narrow paths by which they were to pass.
Near to the summits of the ridge, at which he arrived by a continual ascent of many days, he had his way to form on the fides of frozen mountains, and through mafes of perennial ice, which, at the approach of winter, were now covered with recent snow. Many of his men and horses, coming from a warm climate, perished by the cold; and his army having firuggled, during so long a time, with extremes to which it was little accuflomed, was duced, from fifty thousand foot and nine thousand horse, the numbers which remained to him in  scending the Pyrenees, to twenty thousand foot and fix thousand cavalry, a force, in all appearance, ex- tremely disproportioned to the service for which they were defiined  .
The Roman Consul, in the mean time, had, in search of his enemy, diredted his march to the Rh6ne; and, in three days after the departure of Hannibal, had arrived at the place where he had account of the course of the supposcd Rhane which he visited, he menti- ons nothing of thi Like of Geneva, which is scarcely pollible, if he bad .en it. Polyb. Ib. iii.  47. According to this conjetiure, Hannibal, having marched by the vale of f7ere, Grenoble, Ch2mberry, and Mountmclinn, and descended by the vale of AoRe, munf have passed the Irnmmit at or near the lesser abbey of St. Be!nard. As monntains are penctrated by the channelc of rivers, it is probable that Hannibal, if he were himself to explore his palfage, would try the course of the first considerable river he found on his right descending from the Alp, which was the Ifere: but if, as is extremely probable, he had well. inftrucred go-fes, it is not likely that they would lead him so long a cir- cuit as he mull have made hy the course and sources of the Rhone, when, in fia, he had one equally practicable, and much nearer, by the Ifere on : of the Alps, and the Dorea Baltea on the other.
  Polyb.  iii .  55Liv.  xxi.
passed
pasted that river; but was ltisfied that any further A  attempts to purfiue him in this dire&ion, would only  carrv himself away from what was to be the scene of the war, and from the ground he must occupy for the defence of Italy; he returned therefore without loss of time to his Ihips; fei his brother, Cneius Scipio, with the greater part of the army, to pursue the object of the war in Spain; and he himself, with the remainder, set fail for Pisa, where he landed and put himself at the head of the legions which he found in that quarter; and which had been appointed to rel'ore the fettlecents of Cre- mona and Placentia. With these forces he patled the Po, and was arrived on the Tecinus, when Hannibal came down into the plain country at tome distance below Turin.
The Carthaginian general, at his arrival in those parts, had moved to his right; and, to gratify his new allies the Infubres, inhabiting what is now the dutchy of Milan, who were then at war with the Taurini or Piedmontefe, he laid siege to the capital of that country, and in three days reduced it by force. From thence he continued his march on the left of the Po; and, as the armies advanced, both generals, as if by concert, approached with their cavalry, or light troops, mutually to observe each other. They met on the Tecinus with some  gree of furprize on both lides, and were necessarily engaged in a conflit, which served. as a trial of their refpecive forces, and ir which the Italian ca- valry were defeated by the Spanish and African horse. The Roman Consul was wounded, and with much difficulty rescued from the enemy by his son Publius Cornelius, afterwards so confpi- cuous in the hifiory of this war, but then only a youth of seventeen years of age, entering on his military service  .
(0 Polyb. lb.   3. Vo ,. I. The o The Roman detachment, it seems, had an easy  retreat from the place of this encounter to that of
their main army, and were not pursued. Scipio, disabled by his wound, and probably, from the check he had received, sensible of the enemy fu- periority in the quality of their horse, determined to retire from the plains; repassed the Po, marched up the Trebia, and, to Itop the progress of the Car- thaginians, while he waited for infirutions or rein- forcements from Rome, took poRt on the banks of that river. While he lay in this position, an alarm- effect of his defeat, and of the difaffeaion of some Gauls who professed to be his allies, appeared in the desertion of two thousand horsemen of that nation, who went over to the enemy.
The Roman Senate received these accounts with furprize, and with some degree of consternation. An enemy was arrived in Italy, and had obliged the Consul, with his legions, to retire. The forces which they had lately mustered were numerous, but consisted in part of doubtful friends, qr of  clared enemies. They supposed all their late van- quifhed subjects on the Po to be already in rebel- lion, or to be mustered against them in the Car- thaginian camp. And, notwithstanding the nu- merous levies that could have been made in the city, and in the contiguous colonies; notwithftand the expediency of carrying the war into Africa, as the surest way of forcing the Carthaginians to withdraw their forces from Italy for the defence ol their own country, they, with a degree of pufilla nimity uncommon in their councils, ordered the other Consul, Sempronius Longus, to desist frorr his design upon Africa; they recalled him with hi: army from Sicily, and direted him, without lay, to join his colleague on the Trebia, and, i polTible, to stop the progress of this daring and im petuous enemy. The Consul Sempronius, therefore, after he hadc A  net and defeated a Carthaginian flret on the coast  of Sicily, and was preparing for a descent on Africa, suddenly changed his course, and, having turned the eastern promontories of Sicily and Italy, tteered for Ariminum, where he landed; and, having performed this voyage and march in forty days, joined his colleague, where he lay opposed to Hannibal on the Trebia.
By the arrival of a second Roman Confal, the balance of forces was again restored, and the na- tives still remained in ilifpence between the two parties at war. Instead of a deliverance from ser- vitude, which many of them expected to obtain from the arrival of foreigners to balance the force of the Romans, they began to apprehend, as usual in lucb cafes, a confirmation of their bonds, or a mere change of their mailers. When the conteit should be ended, they wished to have the favour of the victor, and not to share in the fortunes of the vanquished. They had, therefore, waited to lee how the scales were likely to incline, and had not repaired to the standard of Hannibal, in the manner, it is probable, he expected; and this, with every other circumrtance of the war, forced him to rapid and hazardous coun(els. Being too far from his resources to continue a dilatory war, he hafened to secure the necetfary poffeiTions on the Po; and, by the reputation of victory, to deter- mine the wavering inhabitants to declare on his  For thele realons he ever preifed on the enemy, and fought for occasions to draw them into acion. He had been, ever since the encoun- ter on the Tecinus, cautiously avoided by Scipio; who, even after he was reinforced by the other consular army, endeavoured to engage his col* league likewise in the fame dilatory measures; but Sempronius, imputing this caution to the impref- on which Scipio had taken from his late defeat, 2 and o and being confident of his own firength, discover- to the Carthaginian general an inclination to meet him, and to decide the campaign by a gene- ral ation. Sempronius was farther encouraged in this intention by his success in some encounters of foraging parties, which happened soon after he had arrived on this ground; and Hannibal, feeing this disposition of his enemy, took measures to bring on the engagement in circumfiances the moit favour- able to himself.
He had a plain in his front, through which the Trebia ran, and parted the two armies. He wish- to bring the Romans to his own of the river, and to fight on the ground where his army was ac- customed to form. Here, betides the other advan- tages which he proposed to take, he had an oppor- tunity to place an ambuscade, from which he could attack the enemy on the flank or the rear, while they should be engaged in front. It was the middle of winter, and there were frequent show- ers of snow. The enemy infantry, if they should ford the river, and afterwards remain any time active, were likely to surfer considerably from the effeas of wet and cold. Hannibal, to lay them under this disadvantage, sent his cavalry across the fords, with orders to parade on the ground before the enemy lines; and, if attacked, to repass the river with every appearance of flight. He had, in the mean time, concealed a thousand chosen men under the shrubby banks of a brook, which fell into the Trebia beyond the intended field of bat- tle. He had ordered his army to be in readinels, and to prepare themselves with a hearty meal for the fatigues they were likely to undergo.
When the Carthaginian cavalry, passing the river as they had been ordered, presented them- feives to the Romans, it was but break of day, and before the usual hour of the first meal in the Roman camp. The legions were, nevertheless,
hastily
haflily formed; and pursued the enemy to where A  they were seen in disorder to pass the river; and , there, by the directions of their general, who sup- poled he had gained an advantage, and with the ardor which is ullal in the pursuit of victory, they palled the fords, and made a display of their forces on the opposite bank. Hannibal, expecting this event, had already formed his troops on the plain, and made a shew of only covering the retreat of his cavalry, while lie knew that a general atiori could no longer be avoided. After it began in front, the Romans were attacked in the rear by the party which had been potied int ambush for this purpose; and this being added to the other. difad- vantages under which they engaged, they were  feated with great slaughter.
The legions of the centre, to the amount often thoutand men, cut their way through the enemy line, and escaped to Placentia. Of the remainder of the army, the greater part -either fell in the field, perished in attempting to' repass the river, or were taken by the enemy. In this adior;, al- though few of the Africans fell by the sword, they suffered considerably by the cold and asperity of the season, to which they were not accuflomed; and of the elephants, of which Hannibal had brought a considerable number into this country, only one survived the distress of this day  .
In consequence of this vicory, Hannibal secured his quarters on the Po; and, by the treachery of a native of Brundufium, who commanded at Clafti- dium, got pofieflion of that place, after the Ro- mans had fortified and furnished it with confidera- ble magazines for the supply of their own army. In his treatment of the prilbners taken at this place, he made a diftintion between the citizens of Rome and their allies: the first he used with severity, the
others   Polyb.  iii.  74. o others he difmilTed to their several countries, with
assurances that he was come to make war on the Romans, and not on the injured inhabitants of Italy.
The Roman Conifl, Sempronius, was among those who escaped to Placentia. He meant, in his dispatches to the Senate, to have disguised the amount of his loss; but the difficulty with which his meflenger arrived through a country over-run by the enemy, with many other consequences of his defeat, soon published at Rome the extent of that calamity. The people, however, rose in their ardour and animosity, instead of being funk. As awakened from a dream of pusillanimity, in which they had hitherto seemed to confine their views to the defence of Italy, they not only commanded fresh levies to replace the army they had loll on the Trebia, but they ordered the Consul Scipio to his first destination in Spain, and sent forces to Sar- dinia, Sicily, Tarentum, and every other station where they apprehended any defection of their allies, or any impreflion to be made by the enemy  .
The unfortunate Sempronius, being called to the city to hold the elecion of magistrates, escaped, or forced his way through the quarters of the ene- my. He was succeeded by Caius Flaminius and Cn. Servilius; the first, being of obscure extrac-  was chosen in opposition to the Nobles, to whom the people imputed the disasters of the sent war. He was ordered early in the spring to take post at Arretium, that he might guard the paiLes of the Appenines and cover Etruria, while the other Consul was stationed at Ariminum to flop the progress of the enemy, if he attempted to pals by the eastern coast.
Hannibal, (-) ,lyjb.  iii.  7j.
Hannibal, after his first winter in Italy, tookc Hi A  the field for an early campaign; and being dined to counsels the most likely to furprize his enemies, took his way to Etruria, by a palfage in which the vales of the Appenines were marshy, and, from the effects of the season, itill covered with water. In a'firuggle of many days with the hardships of this dangerous march; he loit many of his horses and much of his baggage; and himself, being seized with an inflammation in one of his eyes, loft the use of it. Having appeared, how- ever, in a quarter where he was not expected, he availed himself of this degree of furprize with all his former ativity and vigour.
The charater of Flaminius, who was raised by the favour of the people in opposition to the Senate, and who was now disposed to gratify his conflitu- ents by some action of fpiendor and success, en- couraged Hannibal to hope that he might derive some advantage from the ignorance and prefump- of his enemy. He therefore endeavoured to provoke the new Consul, by destroying the coun- try in his presence, and to brave his resentment, by seeming, on many occasions, to expose himself to his attacks. He even ventured to penetrate into the country beyond him with an appearance of contempt. In one of there movements he marched by the banks of the Lake Thrafimenus, over which the mountains rose with a sudden and steep ascent. He trusted that the Roman Consul would follow him, and occupied a poll from which with advantage to attack him, if he should venture to engage amidst the difficulties of this narrow way. On the day in which his design was ripe for execu-  he was favoured in concealing his position on the ascent of the mountains by a fog which covered the brows of the hills; and he succeeded in draw- the Roman Consul into a snare, in which he perished, with the greater part of his army.
The o a The loss of the Romans in this acion amount-
'_^. to fifteen thousand men who fell by the sword,
or who were forced into the lake and drowned. Of those who escaped by different ways, some tinued their flight for fourscore miles, the distance of this field of battle from Rome, and arrived in the city with the news of this disastrous event. On the sirs reports great multitudes assembled at the place from which the People were accuflomed to receive a communication of public dispatches from :he cfficers of State; and the Praetor, who then commanded in the city, being to inform them of what had passed, began his account of the action with thele words:  We are vanquished in a great  battle; the Consul, with great part of his army,  is slain. He was about to proceed, but could not be heard for the contfernation and the cries which arose among the people: insomuch, that perlbns who had been present in the ation sessed, they heard these words with a deeper im- pression, than any they had received amidst the bloodshed and horrors of the field; and that it was then only they became sensible of the whole extent of their lots.
To encreafe the general affliction, farther ac- counts were brought, at the fame time, that four thousand horse, which had been tent, upon hearing that Hannibal had paited the Appenines, by the Consul Servilius, to support his colleague, were intercepted by the enemy and taken. The Senate continued their meeing for many days without interruption, and the People, greatly affected with the weight of their mortifications and difappuint- ments, committed themselves with proper docility to the conduct of this refpethable body. In confi- dering the cause of thei: repeated defeats, it is bable that they imputed them more to the differ- ence of personal qualities in the leaders, than to any d4ference in the arms, discipline, or courage of
the
bhe troops. In refpe to the choice of weapons A 1'. Hannibal was so much convinced of the fuperio-  rity of the Romans, that he availed hirmr.if of his '\" booty on the Trebia and the Lake Thrafi.menus, to arm his African veterans in their manner  . In refpet to discipline and courage, although mere detachments of the Roman people were likely, in their firfi campaigns, to have been inferior to ve- terans, hardened in the service of many years un- der Hamilcar, Hasdrubal, and Hannibal himself; yet nothing is imputed by any historian to this point of dilparity. They are not said to have been backward in any attack, to have failed their gene- ral in the execution of any plan, to have disobeyed his orders, to have been seized with any panic, or, in any instance, to have given way to the enemy, until, being caught in some snare by the fuperio- rity of the general, they fought with disadvantage, and perilhed in great numbers on the field.
The refuit of the Senate deliberations was to name a Ditator. This measure, except to penfe with iome form that hampered the ordinary magistrate, had not been adopted during an inter- val of five and thirty years. The choice fell upon Quintus Fabius Maximus, who seemed to polFefs hle vigilance, caution, and vigour which were wanted in this arduous itate of affairs. In proceed- to name him, the usual form vhich, perhaps, in matters of ilate, as well as in matters of religion, Ih6uld be supposed indifpenfible, could not be ob- served. Of the consuls, of whom one or the other, according to ancient pracice, ought to name the Dictator, one was dead; the other, being at a difiance, was prevented by the enemy from any communication with the city. The Senate, there- fore, to elude the supposed neceflity of his presence, resolved that not a Dictator, but a Pro-dicator,
should (  PuLh  i;;;  115.
oo should be named; and that the people should
_ themselves chufe this officer, with all the powers
that were usually entrusted to the Dicator him- self. Fabius was accordingly elected Pro-ditator, and in this capacity named  Minutius Rufus for his second in command, or general of the horse.
Wh.ile the Romans weie thus preparing again to collect their forces, Hannibal continued to pur- sue his advantage. He might, with an enemy more easily subdued or daunted than the Romans, already have expeted great fruit from his  ries, at leali he might have expected offers of ceflion and overtures of peace: but it is probable that he knew the character of this people enough, not to flatter himself so early in the war with there expectations, or to hope that he could make any impreiifon by a nearer approach to the city, or by any attempt on its walls. He had already, by his pretence, enabled the nations of the northern and wefiern parts of Italy to shake off the dominion of Rome. He had the fame measures to pursue with refpet to the nations of the South. The capital, he probably supposed, might be deprived of the support of its allies, cut off from its resources, and even detiroyed; but while the State existed, could never be brought to yield to an enemy.
Under there impreflions the Carthaginian general, leaving Rome at a great ditiance on his right, paflfed the Appenines to the coast of Picenum, and from thence diredOed his march to Apulia. Here he proceeded, as he had done on the of Etru- ria and Gaul, to lay waste the Roman settlements, and to detach the natives from their allegiance to Rome. But while he pursued this plan in one ex. tremity of Italy, the Romans took meafilres to recover the pofleflions they had loft on the other, or at leafr to prevent the disaffected Gau from making any considerable diversions in favour of their enemy.
For
For this purpose, while Fabius Maximus was af A  fembling an army to oppose Hannibal in Apulia,  the Praetor, Lucius Pofthumius, was rent with a proper force to the Po. Fabius having united the troops that had served under the Consul Servilius, with four legions newly raised by himself, followed the enemy. On his march he issued a proclamati- on, requiring all the inhabitants of open towns and villages in that quarter of Italy to retire into places of safety, and the inhabitants of every diftrit to which the enemy approached, to set fire to their habitations and granaries, and to destroy whatever they could not remove in their flight  . Though determined not to hazard a battle, he drew near to the Carthaginian army, and continued from the heights to observe and to circumscribe their moti- ons. Time.alone, he trusted, would decide the war in his favour, against an enemy who was far moved from any supply or recruit, and in a country that was daily wasing by the effect of their own depredations.
Hannibal, after endeavouring in vain to bring the Roman Dicator to a battle, perceived his design to protrat the war; and confidering ination as the principal evil he himself had to fear, frequently ex- posed his detachments, and even his whole army,. in dangerous situations. The advantages he gave by there aats of temerity were sometimes effeatu- ally seized by his wary antagonist, but more fre- quently recovered by his own singular conduc and unfailing resources.
In this temporary fiagnation of Hannibal for- tune, and in the frequent opportunities which the Romans had, though in trifling encounters, to measure their own Itrength with that of the enemy, their confidence began to revive. The Public fumed the tranquillity of its Councils, and looked
txJ   xxii.  Iz.
round o Kround with deliberation to colledt its force. The a__4 , people and the army recovered from their late iternation, and took advantage of the breathing- time they had gained, to censure the very conduct to which they owed the returns of their confidence and the renewal of their hopes. They forgot their former defeats, and began to imagine that the ene- my kept his footing in Italy, by the permission, by the timidity, or by the excellive caution of their leader.
A flight advantage over Hannibal, who had too much exposed his foraging parties, gained by the general of the horse in the absence of the Dicta- tor, confirmed the army and the people in this opinion, and greatly funk the reputation of Fabius. As he could not be fiperfeded before the utual term of his office was expired, the Senate and Peo- ple, though precluded by law from proceeding to an actual deposition, came to a reiblution equally violent and unprecedented, and which they hoped might induce him to resign his power. They railed the general of the horse to an equal mand with the Dictator, and left them to adjust their pretensions between them. Such affionts, under the notions of honour, which in modemn times are annexed to the military chara&er, would have made it impoflible for the Dictator to remain in his fiation. But in a commonwealth, where, to put any perlbnal consideration in competition with the public, would have appeared abfiurd; seeming injuries done by the State to the honour of a citi- zen, only furnished him wish a more splendid oc- canion to diftplay his virtue. The Roman Ditator continued to fnrve under this diminution of his rank and command, and overlooked with magna- nimity the inflts with which the people had quited the ,iervice was rendering to his country.
MIinutiun
Minutius being now associated with the Diaator, A  in order to be free from the refiraints of a joint command, and from the wary counsels of his col- league, desired, as the propereft way of adjusting their pretensions, to divide the army between them. In this new situation he soon after, by his rashness, exposed himself and his division to be entirely cut off by the enemy. But being rescued by Fabius, he too gave proofs of a magnanimous spirit, fefled the favour he had received, and committing himself, with the whole army, to the conduct of his colleague, he left this cautious officer, during the remaining period of their joint command, to pursue the plan he had formed for the war  .
At this time, however, the People, and even the Senate, were not willing to wait for the effect of such seemingly languid and dilatory measures as Fabius was inclined to pursue. They resolved to augment the army in Italy to eight legions, which, with an equal number of the allies, amounted to eighty thousand foot and seven thousand two hun- dred horse; and they intended, in the approaching election of Consuls, to chufe men, not only of puted ability, but of decisive and resolute counsels. As such they elected  Terentius Varro, tuppofed to be of a bold and dauntless spirit; and, in order to temper his ardour, joined with him in the mand  Emilius Paulus, an officer of approved experience,. who had formerly obtained a triumph for his victories in llyricum, and who was high in the confidence of the Senate, as well as in that of the People.
In the autumn before the nomination of these officers to command the Roman army, Hannibal had surprised the fortress of Cannar on the Aufidus, a place to which the Roman citizens of that quar- ter had retired with their effets, and at which they
()9 Plutarchi in vit. Fab. Ma.,
had oo sK had colleCted considerable magazines and flores.
This, among other circumfiances, determined the Senate to hazard a battle, and to furnish the new Consuls with inftruEtions to this effect.
These officers, it appears, having opened the campaign on the banks of the Aufidus, advanced by mutual content within fix miles of the Cartha- ginian camp, which covered the village of Cannas. Here they differed in their opinions, and, by a itrange defect in the Roman policy, which, in times of less virtue, mut have been altogether ruinous, and even in there times was ill fitted to produce a consistent and well supported series of operations, had no rule by which to decide their precedency, and were obliged to take the mand each a day in his turn.
Varro, contrary to the opinion of his colleague, proposed to give battle on the plain, and with this intention, as often as the command devolved upon him, still advanced on the enemy. In order that he might occupy the paflage and both fides of the Aufidus, he encamped in two separate divisions on its opposite banks, having his larger division on the right of the river, opposed to Hannibal camp. Still taking the opportunity of his turn to mand the army, he passed with the larger division to a plain, supposed to be on the left of the Aufidus, and there, though the field was too narrow to receive the legions in their usual form, he prefled them together, and gave the enemy, if he chore it, an opportunity to engage. To ac- commodate his order to the extent of his ground, he contracted the head, and the intervals of his manipules or columns, making their depth greatly to exceed the front which they turned to the enemy .
(2) [IT)! CT  Zc;  TUB;t5 : |SI nOivj.   I TO HE slrO
Vid. Polyb. I~ ~Heo
He placed his cavalry on the flanks, the Roman A  knights on his right towards the river, and the'_ , horsemen of the allies on the left.
Hannibal no sooner saw this movement and position of the enemy, than he hastened to meet them on the plain which they had chosen for the field of aftion. He likewise passed the Aufidus, and, with his left to the river and his front to the south, formed his army upon an equal line with that of the enemy.
He placed the Gaulith and Spanish Cavalry on his left facing the Roman knights, and the Nu- midians on his right facing the allies.
The flanks of his infantry, on the right and the left, were composed of the African foot, armed in the Roman manner, with the pilum, the heavy buckler, and the stabbing fvord. His centre, though opposed to the choice of the Roman le- gions, consisted of the Gaulish and the Spanish foot, variously armed and intermixed together.
Hitherto no advantage seemed to be taken on either  As the armies fronted south and north, even the Sun, which rose soon after they were formed, shone upon the flanks, and was no difad- vantage to either. The superiority of numbers was greatly on the of the Romans; but Han- nibal refted his hopes of vicory on two circum- stances; first, on a motion to be -made by his cavalry, if they prevailed on either of the enemy wings; next on a position' he was to take with his centre, in order to begin the aftion from thence, to bring the Roman legions into some disorder, and expose them, under that disadvantage, to the attack which he was prepared to make with his veterans on both their flanks.
The ation accordingly began with a charge of the Gaulilh and Spanish horse, who, being fupe- rior to the Roman knights, drove them from their ground, forced them into the river, and put the
greater greater part of them to the sword. By this event the flank of the Roman army, which might have -'-vbeen joined to the Aufidus, was entirely unco-
vered.
Having performed this service, the vicorious cavalry had orders to wheel at full gallop round the rear of their - army, and to join the Numi- dian horse on their right, who were flill engaged with the .man allies. By this unexpeted junc-  the left wing ot the Roman army was like- wife put to flight, and pursued by the African horse; at the faime time the Spanish cavalry pared to attack the Roman infantry, wherever thev flhouid be ordered on the flank, or the rear.
While these important events took place on the wings, Hannibal amuscd the Roman legions of the main body with a singular movement that was made by the Gauls and Spaniards, and with which he proposed to begin the adion. These came forward, not in a ftreight line abreast, but swelling out to a curve in the centre, without disjoining their flanks from the African infantry, who mained firm on their ground.
By this motion they formed a kind of crescent convex to the front. The Roman manipules of the right and the left, fearing, by this singular disposition to have no share in the action, hastened to bend their line into a corresponding curve, and, in proportion as they came to close with the enemy, charged them with a confident and impetuous courage. The Gauls and Spaniards refilled this charge no longer than was necessary to awaken the precipitant ardour with which vitorious troops often blindly pursue a flying enemy. And the Roman line being bent, and fronting inwards to the centre of its concave, the legions pursued where the enemy led them. Hurrying from the flanks to share in the victory, they narrowed their space as they advanced, and the men who were accustomed
to
to have a square of fix feet clear for wielding their A  arms, being now prefled together, so as to  vent entirely the use of their swords, found them- selves firuggling against each other for space, in an inextricable and hopeless confusion.
Hannibal, who had waited for this event, or- dered a general charge of his cavalry on the rear of the Roman legions, and at the fame time an attack from his African infantry on both their flanks; by these dispositions and joint operations, without any considerable loss to himself, he effeced an almost incredible slaughter of his enemies. With the loss of no more than four thousand, andU.  s57. these chiefly of the Spanish and Gaulish infan- try, he put fifty thousand of the Romans to the sword.
The Consul, Emilius Paulus, had been wound- in the [hock of the cavalry; but when he saw the condition in which the infantry were engaged, he refused to be carried off, and was flain(a). The Consuls of the preceding year, with others of the fame rank, were likewise killed. Of fix thousand horse only seventy troopers escaped with Varro. Of the infantry three thousand fled from the carnage that took place on the field of battle, and ten thousand who had been potled to guard the camp were taken.
The unfortunate Consul, with such of the firagglers as joined him in his retreat, took polt at Venufia; and with a noble confidence in his own integrity, and in the resources of his country, put himlelfin a posture to refill the enemy, till he could have instructions and reinforcements from Rome  . (a) He has received from the poet the following honourable grave: Animzque magno prodigum Paulum fuperance Poeno. Hor. Car.  i. Ode iz.
    xxii.  I. This o This calamity which had befallen the Romans A_, in Apulia, was accompanied with the defeat of
the Praetor Poithumius, who, with his army, on the other extremity of the country, was cut off by the Gauls. A general ferment arose throughout all Italy. Many cantons of Grecian extraction, having been about sixty years subject to Rome, now declared for Carthage. Others, feeling them- selves released from the dominion of the Romans, but intending to recover their liberties, not mere- ly to change their mailers, now waited for for an opportunity to stipulate the conditions on which they were to join the victor. Of this number were the cities of Capua, Tarentum, Locri, Me- tapontus, Crotona, and other towns in the south- east of the peninsula. In other cantons, the peo- ple being divided and opposed to each other with great animosity, severally called to their afliftance filch of the parties at war as they judged were molt likely to support them againfi their antago- nifis. Some of the Roman colonies, even within the diftrifs that were open to the enemy incur- lions, still adhered to the metropolis; but the pofieffions of the republic were greatly reduced and scarcely equalled what the State had acquired before the expulsion of Pyrrhus from Italy, or even before the annexation of Campania, or the conquelt of Samnium. The allegiance of he ufbjects and the faith of her allies in Sicily wer greatly shaken. Hiero, the king of Syracuse who had some time, under the notion of an al liance, cherished his dependance on Rome, bein! now greatly funk in the decline of years, could no longer answer for the conduc of his own court and died soon after this event, leaving his sic ceffors -to change the party of the vanquished fc that of the viEtor.
Hitherto the nations of Greece and of Asia ha taken no part in the contest of those powerful va!
vals. But the Romans having already interfered A  in the affairs of Greece, and made their ambition  be felt beyond the Adriatic and the lonian'fea, the  ' news: of their supposed approaching- fall: was ceived there with attention: it awakened the hopes of many who had suffered from the':effects of their pawer.:. Among there Demetrius, the exileed king of Pharos, being fill.at.. the court of Macedonia, and much in the confidence of Philip, who :.had recently mounted !the throne of that kingdom, urging.that: it was impoflible to reniain an indif- ferent!;fpetator in,' the c6nteft of'fuch powerful nations, persuaded the king to prefer the'alliance of Carthage to that of. Rome, and.to. join with Hannibal in the redu&ion'of the Roman power; observing;: that with.the merit of declaring: himself while the event .was yet.in any degree uncertain, the king, of Macedonia:would be juiily entitled to a proper share of the advantages to be reaped in tlie conquet. ."
"Philipaccordingly endeavoured to accommodate the. differences which he had to adjust with the Grecian States, and' sent 'an officer into Italy to treat with Hannibal, and with the Carthaginian deputies who attendedthe camp. In the negoci- ation which followed it was agreed, ;that .the king of Macedonia and the republic: of Carthage fhbuld confider the Romans as common .enemies; that they should pursue the war in Italy with their for- ces united,and make no peace but on terms mfitu- ally agreeable to both. In this treaty the interest of the prince-of Pharos was particularly attended to; and his reftoration-to the kingdom from which he had been expelled by the Romans,. with the recovery. of the hostages which had been exated from .him, were made principal articles: .:"
"Hannibal, from the time of his arrival in Italy, after having made war for three years in that coun-"
"    xxxiii.  33."
"L try,"
"B ox try, had received no supply from Africa, and . seemed to be left to pursue the career of his fate"
"with such resources as he could devise for himself; but this alliance with the king of Macedonia, pro. mifed amply to make up for the deficiency of his aids from Carthage; and Philip, by an easy pas. sage into Italy, was likely to furnish him with every kind of support or encouragement that was necessary to accomplish the end of the war."
"The Romans were apprised of this formidable accession to the power of their enemy, as well as of the general defetion of their own allies, and of the revolt of their subjeCts. Though taxes-were accu- mulated on the people, and frequent loans obtained from the.commiffaries and contrators employed in the public service, their expences began to be ill supplied. There appeared not, however, in their councils, notwithstanding all there circumstances of distress, the fnalleft disposition to purchase safety by mean concelions of any fort. When the vanquish- Consul returned to the city, in order to attend the nomination of a person who, in this extremity of their fortunes, might be charged with the care of the commonwealth, the Senate, as conscious that he had ated at Cannae by their own inflruei- ons, and had, upon the fame motives that animated the whole Roman People, disdained, with a fupe- rior army, to stand in awe of his enemy, or to fuse him battle upon equal ground, went out in a kind of proceflion to meet him; and, upon a noble idea, that men are not answerable for the firokes of fortune, nor for the effeas of superior address in an enemy, they overlooked his temerity and his mif- conduct in the a&ion; they attended only to the undaunted afpe& he preserved after his defeat, turned him thanks for not having despaired of the commonwealth ; and from thence forward (4) In the famous and admired cxpreffion, Quiz republica non def-"
"tinued"
"tinued their preparations for war, with all the dig- A  nity and pride of the most prosperous fortune.  They refused to ransom the prisoners who had been&-'- taken by the enemy at Canne, and treated with fullen cpntempt, rather than severity, those who by an early flight had escaped from the field; being petitioned to employ them again in the war,  We  have no service, they said,  for men who  could leave their fellow citizens engaged with an  enemy. They seemed to rife in the midfi of their difirefs, and to gain firength from misfortune. They prepared to attack or to resist at once, in all the different quarters to which the war was likely to extend, and took their measures for the support of it in Spain, in Sardinia and Sicily, as well as in Italy. They continued their fleets at sea; not only observed and obftru the communications of Carthage with the feats of the war, but having tercepted part of the correspondence of Philip with Hannibal, they sent a powerful squadron to the coast of Epirus; and, by an alliance with the States of Etolia, whom they persuaded to renew their late war with Philip, found that prince sufficient em- ployment on the frontiers of his own kingdom, es- feEtually prevented his fending any supply to Han- nibal, and, in the sequel, reduced him to the hu- miliating neceltity of making a separate peace."
"In the ordinary notions which are entertained of battles and their consequences, the last viEtory of Hannibal at Cannae, in the sequel of so many others that preceded it, ought to have decided the war; and succeeding ages have blamed this general for not marching direcly to the capital, in order to bring the contest to a speedy termination by the reduction of Rome itself. But his own judgment is of much more weight than that of the persons who censure him. He knew the character of the Romans and his own firength. Though vicorious, he was greatly weakened by his viAories, and at a"
"distance"
"B o distance from the means of a reinforcement or sup."
"n ply. He was unprovided with engines of attack; and, so far from being in a condition to venture on the siege of Rome, that he could not undertake even that of Naples, which, after the battle of Canna:, refused to open its gates; and, 'indeed, soon after this date he received a check from Mar- cellus in attempting the siege of Nola  ."
"The Romans, immediately after their disaster at Cannae, prepared again to act on the offensive, formed a frelh army of five and twenty thousand men, which they sent, under the Dictator.Junius Pera, to colle& the remains of their late vanquished forces, and to annoy the enemy wherever they might find them exposed."
"Hannibal kept in motion with his army to tect the cantons that were inclined to declare on his  but, together with the extent and multiplica- tionr of his new poffefions, which obliged him to divide his army in order to occupy and to secure them, he became sensible of his weakness; and, with the accounts sent to Carthage of his victories, he likewise sent representations of his losses, and  manded a supply of men, of ltores, and of money. He was indeed in his new situation so much in want of there articles, that, having in the three first years of the war apparently raised the reputation of Car- thage to the greatest height, and procured to his country more allies and more territory in Italy than were left in the power of the Romans, together with Capua, and other cities, more wealthy than Rome itfeif, and surrounded with lands better cul- tivated, and more full of. resources, yet his affairs from thenceforward began to decline."
"Armies are apt to susser, no less from an opinion that all the ends of their service are obtained, thar they do from defeats, and from despair of success"
"(:)   xxiii.  14, 15, i6."
"The"
"The soldiers of Hannibal, now elated with vitory, A  perhaps grown rich with the plunder of the coun-  tries they had over-run, and of the armies they , had defeated; and presuming, that the war was at an end, or that they themselves ought to be reliev-  or sent to enjoy the rewards of so glorious and so hard a service, became remiss in their discipline, or indulged themselves in all the excesses, of which the means were to be found in their present fituati- on. Being mere soldiers of fortune, without a country, or any civil ties to unite them together, they were governed by the sole authority of their leader, and by their confidence in his singular abi- lities. Although there is no instance of their openly mutinying against him in a body, there are many initances of thei- separately and clandefiinely  serting his service. The Spanish and Numidian horse, in particular, to whom he owed great part of his victories, upon some disappointment in their hopes, or upon a difguf, taken at the mere flagna- of his fortune, went over in troops and fqua- drons to the enemy  . His hopes from the of Macedonia were entirely disappointed, the pow- er of that nation having full employment at home  . He found himself unable, without di- viding his forces, to preserve his recent conquefis, or to protect the Italians who had declared for him. Some of his polieffions, therefore, he abandoned or destroyed ; and the natives of Italy, become the victims of his policy, or left to the mercy of the Romans whom they had offended, became averse to his cause, or felt that they could not rely on his power to protect them  . Moved by there fiderations, he made earnest applications at Car- thage for reinforcements and supplies, to enable him to continue the war. But the councils of that     xxiii.  46.     xxvi.  2S-- 9.  xxviii.  4. 4/)   xxvii.  I and 16."
"repullic,"
"B 0 republic, though abje& in misfortune, were a_1 solent or remits in prosperity. Being broken in-"
"to fations, the projeAs of one party, however wife, were frustrated by the opposition of the other. One faction received the applications of Hannibal with scorn.  Do vitories, they said,  reduce armies to the want of reinforcements and  of supplies, even againit the very enemies they  had vanquished ? And do the acquisitions of  Hannibal require more money and men to keep  them than were required to make them ? Other viEtorious generals are proud to display the  fruits of their conquefis, or bring home the  spoils of their enemies to enrich their own  country, intfead of draining it to support a ca-
reer of vain and unprofitable vitories. These invectives concluded with a motion, which, on the supposition that the advantages gained by Hannibal were real, was well-founded in wisdom and found policy: that the occasion should be seized to treat with the Romans, when the State had reason to expect the mofi advanta- geous terms. But this council either was, or ap- peared to be, the language of fadion; and no measures were adopted, either to obtain peace, or effecually to support the war."
"The friends as well as the enemies of Hannibal, contributed to the neglet with which he was treated. In proportion as his friends admired him, and gloried in his fortune, they acted as if he alone were able to surmount every difficulty; and they accordingly were remits in supporting him. The republic, under the effects of this wretched policy, with all the advantages of her navigation and of her trade, suffered her navy to decline, and permitted the Romans to obfirut, or molest, all the paifages by which she could municate with her armies in Spain and Italy,"
"QT"
"or her allies in Sicily and Greece (i). They voted A  indeed to Hannibal, on the present occasion, a  inforcement of four thousand Numidian horse, forty elephants, and a fum of money. But this resolution appears to have languiihed in the exe- cution; and the armament, when ready to fail, was suffered to be diverted from its purpose, and ordered to Spain infiead of Italy  ."
"Notwithfianding there mortifications and appointments, Hannibal still kept his footing in Italy for sixteen years; and so long gave sufficient occupation to the Romans, in recovering, by flow and cautious steps, what he had ravi(hed from them in three years, and by a few daring exam- ples of ability and valour. When the war had taken this turn, and the Romans, by the growing skill and ability of their leaders, as well as by the unconquerable spirit of their people, began to prevail, Hannibal, receiving no support dire&ly from Africa, endeavoured to procure it from Spain by the junction of his brother Hasdrubal, to whom he recommended a second pafTage over the Alps, in imitation of that which he himself had accomplished. Every attempt of this fort, however, had been defeated, during fix years, by the vigour and abilities of the two Scipios, Cnaeus and Publius, and afterwards by the superior ge- nius of the young Publius Scipio, who, succeeding the father and the uncle, as will be seen in the sequel, supported, with fresh lultre, the cause of his country."
"The two Scipios, after rome varieties of fortune, though, while they acted together, they were ge- nerally successful, having, in the seventh year of this war, separated their forces, were both, within the space of forty days, betrayed or deserted by (i)   xxviii.  4. (A)   xxiii.  z3. and-Xz."
"their"
"B o their allies, and cut off by the superior force of"
"the enemy."
"The natives of Spain had, by their want of union and military skill, as has been mentioned, suffered many foreign eflablifhments to be made in their country,; they had permitted the Cartha- ginians, in particular, to possess themselves of a considerable territory; but afterwards, in order to remove them from thence, accepted of the tel;con of the Romans; and, in the sequel, occa- fionallv applied to either of these parties for aid against the other, being, during the greater part of this war, the unstable friends, or irresolute enemies of both."
"A service of so much danger, so little in public view, and at a distance from the principal scenes of the war, was not fought for as an opportunity to accumulate fame. The young Scipio, fired with the memory of his father and of his uncle, who had fallen in that service, and, intfead of deterred by their fate, eager to revenge their fall, courted a command, which every other Ro- man is said to have declined. This young man, as has been observed, had begun his military ser- vices, in the firit year of this war, on the Tecinus, where he had the good fortune to rescue his father. He was afterwards present at the battle of Canne, and was one of the few, who, from that disastrous field, forced their way to Canufium. Being cho- fen commander by those who escaped to this place, he prevented the effect of a desperate refo- lution they had taken to abandon Italy. Many of the feverer forms of the commonwealth having been dilpenfed with in the present exigencies of the State, Scipio had been chosen Edile, though under the legal standing and age, being only turned of twenty-four, one year younger than Hannibal was when he took the command of the"
"army"
"army in Spain, and four years younger than he A  was when he marched into Italy.  Such particulars relating to men of superior -' genius and virtue, are in the highest degree inter- eftingto mankind. It is even pleating to know, that this young man was, according to Livy, tall and graceful in his person, with a beautiful coun- tenance, and engaging aspect."
"The Romans had been hitherto preserved in all the extremities of their fortune by the' superiority of their national charater, and by means of poli- tical establishments, which, although they do not inspire men with superior genius, yet raise ordinary citizens to a degree of elevation approaching to heroism; enabling the flates they compose to sub- sift in great dangers, and to await the appearance of superior men. They had not yet opposed to Hannibal an officer of similar talents, or of a like superiority to the ordinary race of mankind. Sci- pio was the first who gave indubitable proofs of his title to this character. (1). Upon his arrival in Spain, with a fleet of thirty gallies, and ten thou- sand men, he found the remains of the vanqui(hed Romans retired within the Iberus, where, under the command of  Fonteius and Lucius Marcius, they had scarcely been able to withstand the fur- ther progress of the enemy  . There he ac- cordingly landed, and fixed his principal quarters for the winter at Tarragona. By his information of the pofRure of the enemy, it appeared, that they had placed all their magazines and flores at New Carthage; and that, thinking this place sufficiently secured by a garrison of a thousand men, they had separated their army into three divisions, and were gone into different diretions to extend their possessions, or to cover the terri- tories they had acquired. Of there divfions, none   LiT.  xxvi.  I8, g1,       xxvi.  19. anld o2"
"tories"
"'s o were nearer to their principal fiation than ten days"
"_ march."
"Upon these informations, Scipio formed a pro. jea to Curprize the town of New Carthage, though at a distance from Tarragona of above three hun- dred miles. He refied his hopes of success on the security of his enemies, and on the profpet of able to accomplish the greater part of his march before his design should be suspected, or before any measures could be taken to prevent him. For this purpose, he disclosed it to Lelius alone; and gave him orders to steer for that place with his fleet, while he himself made hasty marches by land. This city was situated, like Old Car- thage, on a peninsula, or neck of land, surround- by the sea. Scipio took post on the Ifithmus, fortified himself towards the continent, from which he had reason to expedt some attempt would be made to relieve the place, and secured himself on that  before he attacked the town."
"In his first attempt on the ramparts he was pulsed, but observing, that at low water, the walls were accessible at a weaker place than that at which he had made his aftault; and having en- couraged his men, by informing them, that the God of the sea had promired to favour them, which they thought to be verified by the seasonable ebb which ensued, he there planted his ladders, and forced his way into the town. Here he made a great booty in captives, money, and ships  ."
"In this manner Scipio conducted his-firft exploit in Spain; and having carried on the war with equal ability and success for five years, he obliged the Carthaginians, after repeated defeats, to abandon that country. He himself, while Hasdrubal at- tempted to join his brother Hannibal in Lucania, and Mago to make a diversion in his favour in Li-"
"-; Pec!7y:. .  9-:;-;7. A.Fpila :.. fpan."
"guria,"
"guria, returned to Rome. He was yet under thirty A  years of age, and not legally qualified to bear the office of Consul. But having an unquestionable title to the highest confidence of his country, the services which he had already performed procured a dispensation in his favour. He was accordingly raised to the Consulate; and when the provinces came to be assigned to the officers of slate, he moved that Africa should be included in the num- ber, and be allotted to himself:  There, he said,  the Carthaginians may receive the deepest wounds, and from thence be the fooneil obliged  for their own safety to recal their forces from  Italy.
This motion was unfavourably received by the greater part of the Senate; it seemed to be a mat- ter of furprize, that, while Rome itself lay between two hostile armies, that of Hannibal in Brutium, and that of Mago in Liguria or Gaul, the Consul should propose to-i rip the republic of so great a force as would be necessary for the invasion of Africa  . The fatal miscarriage of Regulus on that ground in a former war, the unhappy effects of precipitant counsels in the beginning of the present, were cited against him; and the desire of so arduous a station was even accounted prefump- tuous in so young a man.
Among the difficulties which Scipio met with in obtaining the consent of the Senate to the execution of his plan; is mentioned the disinclination of the great Fabius, who, from a prepossession in favour of that dilatory war, by which he himself had ac- quired Co much glory; and by which, at a time when procraitination was necelary, he had retriev- the fortunes of his country, obstinately opposed the adopting of this hazardous projet.
  Appian Bell. Punic  4.
It O rK It had been, for the most part, an established maxim in the counsels of Rome, to carry war,
when in their power, into the enemy country. They had been prevented in the present cafe only by the unexpected appearance of Hannibal. in Italy, and were likely to return to the execution of their first design as foon:as their affairs at home thould furifh them with a'fufficient respite. We may, therefore, conceive what they felt of the ficulties of the present war, from this and other circumstances; that even after fortune: had so great- ly inclined in their favour,: they did .not yet think themselves in condition to retaliate on the.enemy-; or safe against the designs which Hannibal might form in Italy, if they should divide their forces, or detach so great a part of them as might be necessary to execute the project of a war in Africa.
They concluded, however, at last, with forne hesitation, that Scipio, while the other .Consul should remain opposed: to Hannibal in Italy, might have for his province the island of Sicily, dispose of. the forces that were frill there, receive the voluntary supplies of men and of money, which he himself. might be able to procure; and if he found, upon mature deliberation, a proper op- portunity, that he might make a descent upon Africa. Agreeably to this resolution, he set out for the province afligned him, having a confidera- ble fleet equipped by private.contribution, and a body of seven thousand volunteers, who embarked in high expee.ation of the service in which he posed to employ them  .
WVhile Scipio, by his exertions in Spain,- was rising to this degree of eminence in the councils of his country, the war, both- in Sicily and in Italy, had been attended with many signal events, and funiihed many proofs of difiinguifhed ability in the
  Appian Bell. Punic.
courle
course of its operations, highly interefiing to thofec A  who are qualified to receive infirution from such --. examples of condut, and from the experience of great events. But in the summary account of the iteps by which the Romans ascended to empire, we can only point out the tradt by which they  vanced; and, with a few general observations on the means, haften to contemplate the end which they attained.
The fortunes of Hannibal, as we have already remarked, had been some time on the decline. Capua and Tarentum, notwithfianding his utmost efforts to preserve them, had been taken by the Romans. While the first of these places was fieged, he endeavoured to force the enemies lines; and being repulsed, made a feint, by a haify march towards Rome itself, to draw off the besiegers. By this movement he obtained a fight of that famQus city; but again retired without having gained any advantage from this intended diversion. His al- lies, in Sicily, were entirely overwhelmed by-the reduction of Syracuse; but that which chiefly as- sected his cause, by cutting off all hopes of future supplies or reinforcements, was the fall of his bro- ther Hasdrubal. This officer had found means to elude the forces of Scipio in Spain; and attempt-  by pursuing the trac of his brother into Italy, to join him in that country. In this design he ac- tually surmounted all the difficulties of the Pyre- nees and of the Alps, had passed the Po and the Rubicon, and advanced to the Metaurus before he met with any considerable check. There, at lafi, he encountered with the Roman Consuls,  Claudius Nero and  Livius Salinator, and was defeated with the lots of his whole army, amounting to fifty thousand men, of whom not one escaped being taken or slain (q).
(q)   ximii.  49.
On o On this occasion, the Romans, who had so long
left their poffeflions in the country a prey to the enemy, began to enjoy tome degree of security, returned to their ruined habitations, and resumed the labours of the field. Hannibal, as overwhelm. with despair or affliction, confessed, that he could no longer be in doubt of the fate that await. his country  . From this time he contracted his quarters, withdrew his posts from Apulia, gave intimation to all his allies in Italy, who had much to fear from the resentment of the Romans, that they should retire under the covert of his army in Brutium. Here he himself remained on the defen- five; and, as if sensible that his career in Italy was nearly at an end, ereEted those curious monuments which are cited by Polybius, and on which were recorded the particulars of his march from Spain to Italy, and the numbers of his army at different pe- riods of the war  .
In the following year, Mago, as we have ob- served, being unable to effect any considerable service in Spain, had orders to make fail for Italy, and once more endeavour to reinforce the army of Hannibal. But, having loft some time in a fruit- less attempt on New Carthage, and a report in the mean time having spread of Scipio intention to invade Africa, he received a second order to land at Genua; and, that he might difirad or employ the forces of the Romans at home, endeavour to rekindle the war in Liguria and Gaul.
Such was the state of affairs when Scipio posed to invade Africa, passed into Sicily, and em- ployed the whole year of his Consulate in making preparations. In this interval, however, having access by sea to the coatIs which were occupied by Hannibal in Italy, he forced the town of Locri,   Agofcere re fortunam Cardthginai   xxvii. fine. (.)   xxviiL fine.
and
and poRed a garrison there, under the commandc A  of Pleminius, an officer, whose singular abuses of  power became the fubjeas of complaint at Rome, ' and drew some censure on Scipio himself, by whom he was employed, and supposed to be counte- nanced. Scipio was said, on this occasion, not only to have connived at the outrages committed by Ple- minius, whom he had Rationed at Locri, but to have been himself, while at Syracuse, abandoned to a life of effeminacy and pleasure, unworthy of a person entrufied with so important a command. It may appear firange, that this censure should arise from his having fhewn.a disposition at Syracuse to become acquainted with the learning of the Greeks. His. enemies gave out, that he affeced the man- ners of that people; that he passed his time among books, and in public places of conversation and exercise. Upon these surmises, a commission was granted to the Prateor of Sicily, with ten Senators, two Tribunes of the People, and one of the Ediles, who had orders to join the Proetor in that island. To there instructions were given, that if they found Scipio accessary to the disorders committed at Lo- cri, or reprehensible in his own condu&, they should fend him in arrest to Rome: but that, if they found him innocent, he should continue in his command, and be suffered to carry the war wherever he thought most expedient for the good of the commonwealth. The members of this formidable court of quest, having landed at Locri, in their way to Si- cily, ordered Pleminius, with thirty of his officers, in chains to Rome: and from Locri, proceeding to Syracuse, they reported from thence, that Scipio was no way accessary to the crimes mitted by the troops in garrison at Locri: and that within the diflriEt of his own immediate mand the allies were fully proteted, and the  I. troops o troops, preserved in such order and discipline  , as, whenever they should be employed, gave the
most encouraging profpet of viEtory.
Such was the report in favour of this young man, who appears to have been the sirs Roman statesman or warrior, who shewed any considerable disposition to become acquainted with the literature and ingenious arts of the Greeks. In this particu- lar, his Carthaginian rival is said to have advanced before him, having long fludied the language and learning of those nations; and having in his retinue some persons from Greece to aid him in the use of their writings.
Scipio, while he commanded the Roman army in Spain, having already conceived his design upon Africa, had with this view opened a correspondence with Syphax, king of Numidia; and had actually made a viilt in person to this prince, who, being at variance with Carthage, was easily prevailed upon to promise his support to the Romans, in cafe they should carry the war into that country. The Roman general, now ready to embark with a considerable army, sent Laelius with the first divi- sion, probably to examine the coast, to chufe a proper fation at which to fix the assembling of his fleet, and to call upon the king of Numidia to-per- form his engagements.
This division of the fleet, at its first appearance, was supposed to bring the Roman Proconsul, with all his forces, from Sicily; and the Carthaginians, whatever reason they might, for some time, have had to expea this event, were, in a great measure, unprepared for it. They had their levies to make at home, and troops to hire from abroad; their fortifications were out of repair, and their stores and magazines unfurnished. Even their fleet was not in a condition to meet that of the enemy.
  Lir.  xxil   zo.
They
They now haitened to supply these defects; and A  though undeceived with refped to the numbers  and force of the firit embarkation, they made''\" no doubt that they were soon to expect another i accordingly they continued their preparations, and took every measure to secure themselves, or to avert the form with which they were threat- ened.
They had recently made their peace with Sy- phax, king of Numidia; and, instead of an enemy in the person of this prince, had obtained for them- selves a zealous ally. He had broke off his en- gagements withScipio and the Romans,tempted by his passion for Sophonifba, the daughter of Hafdru- bal, a principal citizen of Carthage, who refused to marry him on any other terms. But this trarnf- action, which procured to the Carthaginians one ally, loft them another: for this high-minded wo- man, who, instead of a dower, contraated'for ar- mies in defence of her country, had forrfnrly cap- tivated Massinissa, another Numidian prince, that, being deprived of his kingdom by Syphax, had received his education, and formed his attachments, at Carthage  . Massinissa, while he had hopes of an alliance with the family of Hasdrubal, engaged all his partisans in Numidia in behalf of the Car- thaginians; and he himself fought their battles in person. But, Rung with his disappointment, and the preference which was given to his rival, he determined to court the favour of their enemies; had made advances to Scipio, before his depar- ture from Spain; and now, hearing of the arrival of the Roman fleet, hastened to Hippo, where Laelius had come to an anchor, and made offer of his assistance, with that of his friends in the kingdom of Numidia.
(a) Appiau Bell. Hifpan.  275. 2 Such o Such was the slate of parties in Africa, when this
country was about to become the scene of war. The Carthaginians, till in hopes of diverting the storm, sent earnest inftrudtions to both their gene- rals to press upon the Romans in Italy, and to make every effort to difiraCt or to occupy their forces, and to leave them no leisure for the invasion of Africa. They sent, at the fame time, an em- baffy to the king of Macedonia, to remind him of the engagements into which he had entered with Hannibal, and to represent the danger to which he and every other prince must be exposed from a people so ambitious as the Romans, if they were suffered to unite, by a conqueR, the resources of Carthage with those of Rome.
Philip, at the earnest intreaty of many Grecian flates, who were anxious that the Romans (hould have no pretext to embroil the affairs of Greece, had, in the preceding year, made a separate peace, firii with the Etolians, and afterwards with the Romans themselves  ; and was now extremely averse to renew the quarrel. The occasion, how- ever, appeared to be of great moment; and he lifened so far to the remonfirances of the Carthagi- nians, as to furnish them with a body of four thou- sand men, and a supply of money.
By such measures as these, hastily taken on the approach of danger, the Carthaginians endeavoured to make amends for the former remissness of their counsels. Hitherto they appear to have confidered the war with little concern, and to have left their exertions to the ambition of a single family, by whom the State was engaged in this quarrel  . They neglected their firength at home, in propor- as they believed the enemy to be at a diitance; and were indifferent to national objeas, while their private interefis were secure.
 )   xxix.  {. () The fonr of Harilcar.
The
The harbour of Hippo, about fifty miles weft A  from Carthage, and under the Fair Promontory, _ being seized by Laelius, furniihed a place of recep- for Scipio fleet. This officer accordingly fail- from Sicily with fifty armed galleys, and four hundred transports. As be had reason to expect, that the country would be laid waste before him, great part of this shipping was employed in carry- his provisions and stores. The numbers of his army are not mentioned. His first object was to make himself matier of Utica, situated about half way between Carthage and Hippo, the place where he landed. He accordingly,'without loss of time, presented himself before it; but loon found himself unable to execute his purpose. The coun- try, to a considerable distance, was laid waste or deserted by the natives, and could not subsist his army. The Carthaginians had a great force in the field, confifing of thirty thousand men, under Hasdrubal the son of Gifgo, together with fifty thousand foot and ten thousand horse, under Syphax king of Numidia, who now advanced to the relief of Utica.
Scipio, on the juncion and approach of there numerous armies, retired from Utica, took poffefli- on of a peninsula on the coast, fortified the isthmus which led to it, and in this station having a safe treat, both for his fleet and his army, continued to be supplied with provisions by sea from Sardinia, Sicily, and Italy. But being thus reduced to a& on the defensive in the presence of a superior ene- my, and not 'likely, without some powerful rein- forcements from Italy, to make any further im- preflion on Africa, he had. recourse to a firatagem which, though amounting nearly to a breach of faith, was supposed to be allowed in war with an African enemy.
The combined armies of Carthage and Numidia lay in two separate encampments, and, it being
winter, o winter, were lodged in huts covered with brush- wood and the leaves of the palm. In these cir-
cumftances the Roman general formed a design to set fire to their camp, and, in the midst of the fusion which that alarm might occasion, to attack them in the night. In order to gain a sufficient knowledge of the ground, and of the ways by which his emiflaries must pass in the execution of this design, he entered into a negotiation, and asset- to treat of conditions for terminating the war. His deputies, under this pretence, being freely admitted into the enemy station, brought him minute information of their position, and of the avenues which led to different parts of their camp.
Scipio being pcffeffed of these informations, broke off the treaty, advanced with his army in the night, and, in many different places at once, set fire to Hasdrubal camp. The flames, being easily caught by the dry materials, spread with the great- eft rapidity. The Carthaginians, supposing that these fires were accidental, and having no appre- henfion of the presence of an enemy, ran without arms to extinguish them: And the Numidians, with still less concern, left their huts to gaze on the scene, or to lend their affifiance. In this slate of security and confusion Scipio attacked and perfed them with great slaughter  ; and being, in consequence of this action, again master of the field, he returned to Utica, and renewed the siege or blockade of that place.
In such a furprize and defeat as the African ar- mies had now received, they were likely to have loft their arms and their baggage, and to have no where sufficient numbers together to withstand an enemy; on this supposition, it had been already proposed at Carthage to have recourse to their last
  Po!yb.    5.   xxx.  6.
retort,
resort, the recalling of Hannibal from Italy. But A  this motion, upon a report from Hasdrubal and Sy-  phax, that they were again arming and aifembling their forces, and that they were joined by a recruit of four thousand men newly arrived from Spain, was for some time laid aside. These hopes, how- ever, were speedily blasted by a second defeat which the combined army received before they were fully assembled, and by a revolution which ensued in the kingdom of Numidia, where Syphax, pursued by Maffinifia and Lalius, was vanquished and driven from his kingdom, which from thence- forward became the polTeflion of his rival, and a great accefion of strength to the Romans. On this calamity Hasdrubal being threatened by the popu- lace of Carthage with vengeance for his repeated miscarriages, and being aware of the relentless and sanguinary spirit of his countrymen, durst not trull himielt in their hands; and in a species of exile, with a body of eight thousand men that adhered to him, withdrew from their service.
In this extremity there was no hope but in the pretence of Hannibal; and expresses were accord- ingly sent both to Mago and himself, to haften their return into Africa, with all the forces they could bring for the defence of their country.
Hannibal, it is probable, had for some time been prepared for this measure, having transports in rea- diness to embark his army; yet he is faid'to have received the order with Come expreilions of rage. They have now accomplished, he said (speaking"
"of the opposite facion at Carthage), what, by withholding from me the necelfary supports in  this war, they have long endeavoured to effect.
They have wilhed to destroy the family of Barcas; and rather than fail in their aim, are willing to bury it at last under the ruins of their country  .
    xxx.  2o.
VWhilc O While the Carthaginians were thus driven to
. their last resource, Scipio advanced towards their <' tcity, and invested at once both Tunis and Utica,
which, though at the difiance of above thirty miles from each other, may be confidered as bastions on -the right and the left, which flanked and manded the country which led to this famous place. His approach gave the citizens a frelh alarm, and seemed to bring their danger too near to susser them to await the arrival of relief from Italy. It appeared necessary to itay the arm of the victor by a treaty; and thirty Senators were accordingly  puted to sue for peace. These deputies, in their address to the Roman Proconsul, laid the blame of the war upon Hannibal, supported, as they al- leged, by a desperate faction who had adopted his wild designs. They intreated that the Romans would once more be pleated to spare a republic which was again brought to the brink of ruin by the precipitant counsels of a few of its mem- bers.
In answer to this abject request, Scipio menti- oned the terms upon which he supposed that the Romans would be willing to treat of a peace. cessation of arms was agreed to, and a negotiation commenced; but it was suddenly interrupted and prevented of its final effec by the arrival of Han- nibal. This general, after many changes of for- tune, having taken the necessary precautions to fe- cure his retreat, in cafe he should be called off for the defence of Carthage; now in the seventeenth year of the war, and after he had supported him- self sixteen years in Italy, by the sole force of his nerfonal character and abilities, against the whole weight, insiitutions, resources, discipline, and na-   cs.',tional character of the Romans, transported his
army from thence, landed at Hadrumetum, at a distance from any of the quarters occupied by the Romans, and drew to his itandard all the remains
of
of the lately vanquished armies of Carthage, andc A  all the forces which the republic was yet in a state to supply.
This event produced a change in the counsels of Carthage, and inspired the people with fresh fumption. They now flighted the faith which they had lately engaged to Scipio, and seized on all the Roman vessels, which, trusting to the cef- fation of arms, had taken refuge in their bay. They even insulted the messenger whom the Ro- man general sent to complain of this outrage; and thus hostilities, after a very Lhort truce, were newed with redoubled animosity and rancour on both fides.
The people of Carthage, under dreadful appre- henfions of becoming a prey to the Romans, sent a melfage to Hannibal, then at Hadrumetum, to haften his march, requefiing him to attack the enemy, and at any hazard to relieve the city from the dangers and hardships of a siege. To this mef. sage he made answer, That in affairs of State the Councils of Carthage must decide; but in the dut of war, the general who commands must judge of his opportunity to fight.
The forcing of Hannibal to evacuate Italy was a victory to Scipio; as this was the firif fruit which he ventured to promise from the invasion of Africa. With this enemy, however, in his rear, it was not expedient to continue the attack of Tunis or Utica. He withdrew his army from both there places, and prepared to contend for the poffeflion of the field.
The Carthaginian leader, having colleced his forces at Hadrumetum, marched to the westward, intending to occupy the banks of the Bagrada, and from thence to observe and counteract the opera- tions of his enemy. Scipio, intending to prevent him, or to occupy the advantageous ground on the Upper Bagrada, took his route to the fame
country; oo : country; and while both direted their march 
- Sicca, they met on the plains of Zama.
When the armies arrived on this ground, neithe party was in condition to protract the war. Han nibal, whose interest it would have been to avoic any hazardous measures, and to tire out his enerm by delays, if he were in possession of his own coun try, or able to protect the capital from insult, wa: in reality obliged to risk the whole of its fortunes in order to rescue it from the hands of the enemy or to prevent their renewing the blockade.
Scipio was far advanced in an enemy country, which was soon likely to be defcrted by its natives, and exhaufied of every means of subsistence; he was far removed from the sea, the principal and only secure bource of any lasting supply; surround. by enemies; a great army under Hannibal in his front; the cities of Utica, Carthage, and Tu- nis, with all the armed force that defended them, in his rear.
In ilch circumfiances, both parties probably saw the necellity of immediate action; and the Carthaginian general, sensible of the unequal fltake he was to play, the fafcty of his country against the fortune of a tingle army, whose loss would not materially assed the State from whence they came, chose to try the effect of negotiation, and for this purpose desired a personal interview with Scipio.
In compliance with this request, the Roman ge- neral put his army in motion, and the Carthagini- ans advancing at the fame time, they halted at the diitance of thirty stadia, or about three miles, from each other. The generals, attended by a few horse, met on an eminence between their lines. Hannibal began the conference, by exprelling his regret that the Carthaginians should have aimed at any conquefls beyond their own coasts in Africa, or the Romans beyond those of Italy.  We be-"
" gan,"
"gan, he said,  with a contell for Sicily; wec A  proceeded to dispute the poffefflon of Spain, and  we have each in our turns seen our native land
over-run with firangers, and our country in dan- ger of becoming a prey to its enemies. It is time that we should distrust our fortune, and
drop an animosity which has brought us both to  the verge of defirution. This language indeed  may have little weight with you, who have been  successful in all your attempts, and who have"
"not yet experienced any reverse of fortune; but I pray you to profit by the experience of others. You now behold in me a person who was once almotl mafier of your country, and who am now"
"brought, at lair, to the defence of my own. I encamped within five miles of Rome, and of- sered the poffeflions round the Forum to sale. Urge not the chance of war too far. I now of- ser to surrender, on the part of Carthage, all her pretensions. to Spain, Sardinia, Sicily, and every other island that lies between this conti- nent and yours. I with only for peace to my country, that she may enjoy undifiurbed her an- tient poffeflions on this coast; and 1 think, that the terms I offer you are sufficiently advan- tageous and honourable to procure it. To this address Scipio replied,  That the Ro- mans had not been aggressors in the present or preceding wars with Carthage: that they firove to maintain their own rights, and to proteEt their"
"allies; and that, suitably to there righteous tentions, they had been favoured by the juflice of the gods: that no one knew better than him-  self the infiability of human affairs, nor should be more on his guard against the chances of"
"war. The terms, he said,  which you now propose might have been accepted of, had you offered them while yet in Italy, and had posed, as a prelude to the treaty, to remove
 from"
"B from thence; but now, that you are driven"
"_  from every poll, you propose to surrender, and
' are forced not only to evacuate the Roman ter.
ritory, but are firipped of part of your own. There conceflions are no longer sufficient; they  are no more than a part of the conditions al."
"ready agreed to by your countrymen, and  which they, on your appearance in Africa, so  basely retraced. Besides what you now offer, ' it was promised on their part, that all Roman captives should be reltored without ransom; that  all armed ships should be delivered up; that a ': fum of five thousand talents should be paid, and hostages given by Carthage for the performance  of all there articles.
 On the credit of this agreement we granted a  cessation of arms, but were shamefully betrayed  by the councils of Carthage. Now to abate any  part of the articles which were then flipulated,  would be to reward a breach of faith, and to  Itrut nations hereafter how to profit by perfidy.  You may therefore be assured, that I will not so  much as transmit to Rome any proposal that  does not contain, as preliminaries, every article formerly tfipulated, together with filch additi-  onal concetifons as may induce the Romans  to renew the treaty. On any other terms than  there, Carthage must vanquish, or submit at cretion (a)."
"From this interview both parties withdrew with an immediate profpet of  and on the fol- lowing day, neither having any hopes of advan- tage from delay or furprize, came forth into the plain in order of battle."
"Hannibal formed his army in three lines with ;heir elephants in front."
"(a) Polyb.  rv.  6. 7, 8"
"Scipio"
"Scipio drew forth his legions in their usual divi- A  sions, but somewhat differently disposed.  Hannibal had above eighty elephants, with which he proposed to begin the aAion. Behind there he formed the mercenary troops, composed of Gauls, Ligurians, and Spaniards. In a fe- cond line he placed the Africans and natives of Carthage; and in a third line, about half a quar- ter of a mile behind the first, he placed the vete- rans who had shared with himself in all the dan- gers and honours of the Italian war. He placed his cavalry in the wings, opposite to those of the enemy."
"Scipio pofled Lxelius with the Roman cavalry on his left, and Massinissa with the Numidian horse on his right. He placed the manipules, or divi- lions of the legions, not as usual, mutually co- vering their intervals, but covering each other from front to rear. His intention in this disposition was to leave continued avenues or lanes, through which the elephants might pass without disordering the columns. At the- head of each line he placed the Velites, or irregular infantry, with orders to gall the elephants, and endeavour to force them back upon their own lines; or if this could not be es- fe  to fly before them into the intervals of the heavy-armed foot, and, by the ways which were left open between the manipules, to conduEt them into the rear. It being the nature of there animals, even in their wild state, to be the dupes of their own resentment, and to follow the hunter by whom they are galled into any snare that is pared for them  ; the design thus formed by Scipio to mislead them, accordingly proved fuc- cefsful. As soon as the cavalry began to skirmish on the wings, Hannibal gave the signal for the elephants to charge. They were received by a"
"(6) Vid. Buff. HiR. Not."
"'shower"
"B O shower of miflile weapons from the Roman light"
"L infantry, and, as usual, carried their riders in"
"different directions. Some broke into their own line with considerable disorder, others fled tween the armies and escaped by the flanks, and many, incited with rage, as Scipio had foreseen, purlued the enemy that galled them through the intervals of the Roman divisions quite out of the action; and in a little time the front of the two armies was cleared of there animals, and of all the irregulars who had skirmished between them in the beginning of the battle."
"In the mean time the first and second line of Hannibal foot had advanced, to profit by the impression which the elephants were likely to make. The Third line still remained on its ground, and seemed to Itand aloof from the action."
"In this poflure, the first line of the Carthaginian army, composed of Gauls and Ligurians, engaged with the Roman legions; and, after a short finance, were forced back on the second line, who having orders not to receive them, nor allow them to pars, presented their arms. The fugitives were accordingly massacred on both fides, and fell by the swords of their own party, or by those of the enemy."
"The second line, consisting of the African and native troops of Carthage, had a similar fate; they perished by the hands of the Romans, or by those of their own reserve, who had orders to receive them on their swords, and turn them back, if possible, againfi the enemy."
"Scipio, after so much blood had been shed, find- his men out of breath and spent with hard  bour, embarrassed with heaps of the slain, scarcely able to keep their footing on ground become flip- pery with mud and gore, and in these circum- liances likely to be instantly attacked by a fresh enemy, who had yet borne no part in the contest;"
"he"
"he endeavoured, without loss of time, to put him- A  self in a posture to renew the engagement.  His cavalry, by good fortune, in there hazard-' ous circumfiances, were victorious on both the wings, and were gone in pursuit of the enemy. He ordered the ground to be cleared; and his co- lumns, in the original form of the action, having been somewhat displaced, he ordered those of the firlf line to close to the centre; those of the second and third to divide, and, gaining the flanks, to form in a continued line with the front. In this manner, while the ground was clearing of the dead, probably by the Velites or irregular troops, he, with the least poflible loss of time, and without any interval of confusion, completed his line to receive the enemy. An acion ensued, which, to decide the event of this memorable war, was likely to remain some time in fufpence; when the cavalry of the Roman army, returning from the pursuit of the horse they had routed, fell on the flank of the Carthaginian infantry, and ob- liged them to give way."
"Hannibal had refted his hopes of victory on the disorder that might arise from the attack of his elephants, and if this should fail, on the steady va- lour of the veterans, whom he reserved for the last effort to be made, when he supposed that the Ro- mans, already exhausted in their conflict with the two several lines whom he sacrificed to their ardour in the beginning of the battle, might be unable to contend with the third, yet fresh for action and ured to victory. He was disappointed in the effect of his elephants, by the precaution which Scipio had taken in opening his intervals, and in forming continued lanes for their paflage from front to rear; and of the effeEt of his reserve, by the turn of the enemy horse, while the action was"
"yet"
"B O yet undecided  . Having taken no measures to"
"'secure a retreat, nor to save any part of his army, he obstinately fought every minute of the day to the last; and when he could delay the victory of his enemy no longer, he quitted the field with a small party of horse, of whom many, overwhelmed with hunger and fatigue, having fallen by the way, he arrived with a few, in the course of two days and two nights, at Hadrumetum. Here he embarked and proceeded by sea to Carthage. His arrival convinced his countrymen of the extent of their loss. Seeing Hannibal without an army, they believed themselves vanquished; and, with minds unprovided with that spirit which supported the Romans when overthrown at Thrafimenus and Canna, were now desirous, by any concessions, to avert the supposed necefTary consequences of their fate."
"The riotous populace, that had so lately pursued with vengeance, and threatened to tear asunder the supposed authors of peace  , were now silent, and ready to embrace any terms that might be prescribed by the enemy. Hannibal, knowing how little his countrymen were qualified to tend with misfortune, confessed in the Senate, that he was come from deciding, not the event of a tingle battle, but the fate of a great war, and advised them to accept of the or terms  . They accordingly determined to file for peace."
"In the mean time the Roman army, in pursuit of its victory, was returned to the coast; and having received from Italy a large supply of flores and military engines, together with a reinforce- ment of fifty galleys, was in a condition, not only to resume the siege of Utica and Tunis, but like-   Polyb.  xr.  16.   Appian Bell. Punic.  31.   Polyb. lb.   4-17.   Xxr.  31."
"wife"
"wife to threaten with a fiorm the capital itself; and, A  for this purpose, began to invefi the town and block ;. up the harbour. Scipio being himself embarked, and conduc- the fleet to its flation, was met by a Carthagi- nian vessel that hoisted wreaths of olive and other ensigns of peace. This vessel had ten commission- ers on board, who were authorised to declare the submission of Carthage, and to receive the vitor commands."
"The ambition of Scipio might have inclined him to urge his vicory to the utmost, that he might car- ry, inflead of a treaty, the spoils of Carthage to adorn his triumph at Rome. But the impatience with which the Consuls of the present and of the preceding year endeavoured to snatch from his hands the glory of terminating the war, may, with other motives, have induced him to receive the submission of the vanquished upon the first terms that appeared sufficiently honourable, and suited to the object of the commission with which he had been entrusted."
"In allusion to this circumflance, he was heard to fay, that Claudius, by his impatience to supplant him in this command, had saved the republic of Carthage  . But men seldom adt from any fin- gle consideration ; and Scipio is, in all probability, jufily supposed to have had other and nobler motives than thisjealoufy of a successor. He is even said to have spared the rival of his country, in order to maintain the emulation of courage and of national virtue. This motive Cato, who had served under him in the capacity of Quaftor, and who was not inclined to flatter, did him the honour to aflign in a speech to the Senate  ."
"Scipio, having appointed the Carthaginian miRffoners to attend him at Tunis, prescribed the following terms:"
"  Appian Bell. Punic.  36.     I. That"
"B 0 0 That Carthage should continue to hold in Africa"
"L all that she had poffiffed before the war, and be go-"
"verned by her own laws and institutions:"
"That she should make immediate reititution of all Roman ships or other effecs taken in violation of the late truce:"
"Should release or deliver up all captives, defer- ters, or fugitive slaves taken or received during any part of the war:"
"Surrender the whole of her fleet, saving ten gal- lies of three tier of oars:"
"Deliver up all the elephants the then had in the stalls of the republic, and refrain from taming or breaking any more of those animals:"
"That she should not make war en any nation whatever without content of the Romans:"
"That she should indemnify Mafliniffa for all the losses he had fuitained in the late war:"
"And, to reimburse the Romans, pay a fum of ten thousand talents  , at the rate of two hun- dred talents a-year for fifty years:"
"That the State should give hoflages for the per- formance of these several articles, such as Scipio should fele& from the noblest families of Carthage not under fourteen, nor exceeding thirty years of age:"
"And that, until this treaty should be ratified, they should supply the Roman forces in Africa with pay and proviiions."
"When these conditions were reported in the Se- nate of Carthage, one of the members arose, and, in terms of indignation, attempted to dissuade the acceptance of them: but Hannibal, with the tone of a master, interrupted and commanded him si- lence. This action was relented by a general cry of di'pleafure; and Hannibal, in excuse of his rash- ness, informed the Senate, that he had left Carthage"
"(:') Near two millions flrl ."
"while"
"while yet a child of nine years old; that he wasc A  now at the age of forty-five; and, after a life spent in camps and military operations, returned for the first time to bear his part in political councils; that he hoped they would bear with his inexperience in matters of civil form, and regard more the tenden- cy than the manner of what he had done; that he was sensible the proposed terms of peace were un- favourable, but he knew not how else his country was to be rescued from her present difficulties; he wished to reserve her for a time in which she could exert her resolution with more advantage. He hoped that the Senate would, in the present extre- mity, accept, without hesitation, and even without consulting the people, conditions which, though hard, were, notwithstanding, less fatal to the monwealth than any one could have hoped for in the night that followed the battle of Zama (i)."
"The conditions were accordingly accepted, and deputies were sent to Rome with concessions, whichu  .5. in some measure stripped the republic of her fove- reignty. The ratification of the treaty was remitted to Scipio, and the peace concluded on the terms he had prescribed."
"Four thousand Roman captives were instantly released: five hundred gallies were delivered up and burnt: the first payment of two hundred ta- lents was exaaed, and, under the execution of this article, many members of the Carthaginian Senate were in tears. Hannibal was observed to smile, and being questioned on this insult to the public distress, made answer, That a smile of scorn for those who felt not the loss of their country, until it affected their own interest, was an expression of sorrow for Carthage."
"(i) Polyb.  . i. I . .  xx.  37."
"N2 "
"C A   State of Rome at the Peace with Carthage.-Fiars"
"with the Gauls.-With the Macedonians.-Battle of CynocephaLe.-Peace.-Freedom to Greece.- Preludes to the War with Antiochus.-Flight of Hannibal to that Prince.-Antiochus passes into Eu- rope.-Difpofitions mrade by the Romans.-Flight of Antiochus to Afia.-His defeat at the Mountains of Sipylus.-Peace and Settlement of fia.-Courfe of Roman Affairs at Home,   o the course of the war, which terminated in so"
"1. distinguished a superiority of the Roman over '-,, the Carthaginian republic, the vitors had experi-"
"enced much greater distress than had, even in the last stage of the confli&, fallen to the share of the vanquished. The greater part of their territory, during a series of years, lay waste; was ruined in its habitations, plundered of its slaves and its cattle, and deserted of its people. The city itself was reduced to a scanty supply of provisions that threat- ened immediate famine (a). Among other modes of taxation devised at this time, the monopoly of salt was eiablifhed or renewed; but every public fund that was constituted in the ordinary way insufficient, the State had recourse to the volun- tary'contribution of its members, and called for their plate and other ornaments of silver and gold to defray the expences. They debated their silver coin by a great mixture of alloy, and farther duced the copper As from its late coinage at two ounces to one  . The numbers of the people on the rolls, either by desertion or by the sword of the (a) Po!yb. Excerpt= Legationes.   Pli. Nit. Hiht.  iii.  iii."
"enemy,"
"enemy, uncommonly fatal in such a series of bat- A  ties, were reduced from two hundred and seventy vl. thousand to nearly the half  ."
"In the musters and levies, no less than twelve colonies at once withheld their names, and restsed their support. Yet,-proof againit the whole of these sufferings, the Romans maintained the conflit with a resolution, which teemed to imply, that they fidered the smallest concession as equivalent to ruin. In the farther exertion of this unconquera- ble spirit, when the pressure of this war was moved, their fortunes rose to a flood of prosperity and greatness, proportioned to.the low ebb to which they seemed to have fallen in the course of it."
"They joined, .in Sicily, to their ;former poffeffi- ons, the city of Syraculle,,and;the whole kingdom of Hiero. In Spain, they succeeded to all the pof- fefions, to all the claims 'and: pretensions of Car- thage, and became maiters of all that had been the subjet of dispute in the war. They brought Car- thage herself under contribution, and reduced her almost to the itate of a province."
"On the of Macedonia and Illyricum, in their treaty with Philip and his allies, they retained to themselves considerable pledges, not only of fecu- rity, biutof power; and began to be confidered in the councils of Greece, as the principal arbiters of the fortunes of nations."
"In Italy, where their progress was still of greater consequence, they became more absolute masters than they had been before the war. The cantons, which, in so general a defetion of their other allies, had continued faithful to .them, were fond of the merit they had acquired, and were confirmed in their attachment by the habits of zeal which they had exerted in so prosperous a cajufe. Those, on   These were probably the citizens, fit to carry arms, residing in the city; for it was not yet the pracice to enrol thrfe who did not offer their armes at Rome."
"the"
"o o the contrary, who had revolted, or withdrawn their"
"allegiance, were reduced to a state of fubmiflion more entire than they had formerly acknowledged; and the sovereignty of this whole country being, till now, precarious and tottering, derived, from the very storm which had shaken it, fiability and force."
"But, notwithstanding the splendor of such rapid advancement, and of the high military and poli- tical talents which procured it, if by any accident the career of the Romans had been flopt at the present ara, their name, it is probable, would ne- ver have appeared on the record of polished nati- ons, nor they themselves been otherwise known than as a barbarous dynasty, that fell a prey to some more fortunate pretenders to dominion and conquest."
"The Romans, being altogether men of the sword, or of the State, made no application to letters, or sedentary occupations. Cato is introduced by Ci- cero as faying, That it had been anciently the fa- Ihion at Roman feaits to sing heroic ballads in ho- nour of their ancestors; but that this custom had been discontinued in his own time; and it is bable, from the great change which their language underwent in a few years, that they had no popular or efiablifhed compositions in writing, or even in vulgar tradition, by which the uniformity of lan- guage has, in other inflances, been longer served. They had hitherto no hifiorian, poet, or philosopher, and it was only now, that any tafie began to appear for the compositions of such au- thors. Fabius, Ennius, and Cato, became the first hifiorians of their country, and raised the firfi lite- rary monuments of genius that were to remain with posterity  ."
"  In the fxth century of Rome."
"The"
"The inclination which now appeared for thec A  learning of the Greeks was, by many, confidered  as a mark of degeneracy, and gave rife to the ne-' ver-ending dispute, which, in this as in other nati- ons, took place between the patrons of ancient and modern manners. The admirers of ancient times, being attached to what they received from iheir an- ceflors, were disposed to reject every new improve- ment, and seemed willing to flop the progress of ingenuity itself. The gay and the faihionable, on the other hand, liked what was new; were fond of every change, and would ever adopt the latest invention as the model of propriety, elegance; and beauty.
To the frmplicity of the Roman manners in other refpeas, and to the ability of the molt ac- complifhed councils of State, was joined a very gross superstition, which led to many acts ofabfur- dity and cruelty. In this particular it appears, that the conceptions of men are altogether unconnected with their civil and political, as well as military charader; and that the rites they adopt, even when innocent, and the most admissible expreflions of worship, do not deserve to be recorded for any other purpose, than to shew how far they are arbi- trary; and how little, in many infiances, they-are direced, even among nations otherwifethe most accomplished by any rule of utility, humanity, or reason.
A little time before the breaking out of the late war, the Roman Senate, upon the report of a phecy, that the Gauls and the Greeks were to pof- fess the city, ordered a man and a woman of each of those nations to be buried alive in the market- place; supposing, we may imagine, that, by this at of monRftrous injustice and cruelty, they were to fulfil or elude the prediction  . They attended
(.) Plutaich. in Vit. bMtlcell.
to o to the numberless prodigies that were annually col-
..leted, and to the charms that were suggested to
avert the evils which those prodigies were supposed to presage, no less than they did to the most feri- ous affairs of the Commonwealth  . They fre. quently seemed to impute their diftrefres, more to the neglect of fluperflitious rites, than to the mif- conduEt of their officers, or to the superiority of their enemies. Fabius, who, by perseverance and fleadinefs, had the merit of reitoring their affairs, was no less celebrated for his diligence in averting the effect of prodigies and unhappy presages, than he was for the conduEt and ability of a cautious and ficcefsful commander  . Even Scipio is said to have been influenced by his dreams, and to have pretended to special revelations.
From such examples as these, we may learn the fallacy of partial representations of national charac- ter, and carefully to guard against drawing any ference from the defects or accomplishments which a people may exhibit of one kind, to eflablilh those of another.
The peace with Carthage was introduced with some popular acts in favour of those who had sus- sered remarkably in the hardships and dangers of the war. Large quantities of corn that had been seized in the magazines of the enemy, were fold in the city at a low price, and a considerable diftribu- iion of land was made to numbers of the people in reward of their long and perilous services.
These precedents, however reasonable in the circumstances from which they arose, were the sources of great abuse; private citizens, in the fe- quel, were taught to rely on public gratuities, and were made to hope, that, in the midst of sloth and riot, they might subsist without care, and without industry. Soldiers were taught to expect extraor-
  1e  pfi;rn.   Plutarch. in Vit. Fb. Mas.
dinary
dinary rewards for ordinary services; and ambiti A  ous leaders were. inftruaed how to tiansfer the as- feaion and the. hopes of the legions from the public to themselves. The treaty with Carthage, while it terminated the principal war in which the Romans were en- gaged, left them at leisure to pursue a variety of quarrels, which till remained on their hands, rather than bestowed entire peace. The Infubres, and other Gaulish nations on the Po, although they had not taken the full advantage, which the pretence of Hannibal in Italy might have given them against the Romans, were unable to remain at peace, and were unwilling to acknowledge the sovereignty of any nation over their own. Having a Carthaginian exile, of the name of Hamilcar, at their head, they attempted again to dislodge the colonies of Cre- mona and Placentia; and, on that  with vari- ous events for some years, furnilhed occupation to the arms of the republic.
Philip, notwithstanding the treaty of peace, which, about three years before, he had concluded with the Romans, had lately supplied the Cartha- ginians with an aid of four thousand men, and a fum of money. Of the men he had sent to the as- fiflance of Carthage, many had been taken at the battle of Zama, and detained as captives. Trust-  however, to the authority of his crown, he sent, during the dependance of the treaty between the Romans and Carthaginians, a meflage to  mand the enlargement of those Macedonian cap- tives. To this message the Senate replied with dain, that the king of Macedonia appeared to  fire a war, and should have it.
The People, nevertheless, wearied and exhault- with the late contest, engaged in this war with uncommon reluctance. The Senate, they thought, was direted by the ambition of a few members, who never ceased to seek for new fubjeAs of tri-
umph, o umph, and for fresh occasion of military honours.
,' But ,twithfianding their aversion to enter into a
war upon these motives, they were persuaded to give tieir content upon a representation of the great progrels which was making by the king of Macedonia, and the supposed neceflity of carrying the war into his own country, in order to check or prevent his designs upon Italy.
Philip, from being the head of a free confede- racy, in which the Achaans, and many other fates of Greece, were united, aspired to become the def- potic Sovereign of that country; and, either by insinuation or force, had made himself master of most places of consequence round the ]Egean sea, whether in Europe or Asia. Upon the death of Ptolemy Philopater, and the fucceflion of an infant son of that prince to the throne of Egypt, Philip had entered into a treaty with Antiochus, king of Syria, to divide between them the possessions of the Egyptian monarchy; and, in order to be ready for his more difiant operations, was busy in ducing the places which still held out againfl him in Greece, and in its neighbourhood.
For this purpose he sent an army with orders to take pofeifflon of Athens, and was himself employed in the siege of Abvdos. The Athenians sent a message to Rome to sue for protecion.  It is no longer a  question, said the Consul Sulpicius, in his ha- rangue to the people,  whether you will have a
war with Philip, but whether you will have that  war in Miacedonia or in Italy. If you flay until Philip has taken Athens, as Hannibal took Sa-  guium, you may then fee him arrive in Italy, not after a march of five months, and after the  Datfage of tremendous mountains, but after a voyage of five days from his embarkation at  Corinth.
These considerations decided the resolution of the Roman People for war; and the officers, yet
remaining
remaining in Sicily at the head of the sea and thec A  land forces that had been employed against Car- . thage, had orders, without touching on Italy, to make fail for the coalt of Epirus. The Consul Sulpicius was destined to command   ssz. in that country. He found, upon his arrival, that Attalus, the king of Pergamus, and the republic of Rhodes, had taken arms to oppose the progress of Philip. In concert with these allies, and in junction with the Dardanians and other cantons who joined him on the frontiers of Macedonia, the Roman Consul was enabled to relieve and to tect the Athenians. But the other flates of Greece, though already averse to the pretensions of Philip, and impatient of his usurpations; even the Etoli- ans, though the most determined opponents of this prince, seemed to be undecided on this occasion, and deferred entering into any engagement with the Romans. The reputation of the Macedonian armies was still very high; and it was doubtful, whether there Italian invaders, confidered as an upfiart and a barbarous power, might be able to protect the flates that declared for them against the vengeance of so great a king  .
The two first years of the war elapsed without any decisive event. Philip took post on the moun- tains that separate Epirus from Thessaly, and es- fetually prevented the Romans from penetrating any farther. But, in the third year, Titus Quin- tius Flamininus, yet a young man under thirty years of age, being Consul, and destined to this command; brought to an immediate issue a test which, till then, had been held in furpence.
The Roman legion, except in its firfi encoun- ters with Pyrrhus, had never measured its force, or compared its advantages with any troops formed on the Grecian model, and, to those who reasoned
(6) Plutarch. in Vit. Flamin.  407.
on 0 on the fiubjet, may have appeared greatly inferior
to the Macedonian phalanx. One prefiniption indeed, had appeared in favour of the legion, that both Pyrrhus and Hannibal thought proper to adopt its weapons, though there is no account of their having imitated the line-of battle, or form of its manipules.
The phalanx was calculated to present a firong and impenetrable front, supported by a depth of column, which might be varied occasionally to suit withthe ground. The men were armed with spears of twenty-one or twenty-four feet in length. 'The five first ranks could level and carry their points to the front of the column. The remainder refled their spears obliquely on the shoulders of those that were before then; and, in this pofiure, formed a kind of shed to intercept the miftiles of the enemy; and, with their pressure, supported, or urged, the front of their own column.
In the shock of the phalanx and legion, it is computed, that every tingle man in the front of the legion, requiring a square space of fix feet in which to ply his weapons, and acing with his buckler and sword, had ten points of the enemy spears opposed to him:   nevertheless, the strength of the phalanx being entirely collected in front, and depending on the ofenefs of its order; when at- tacked on the flank or the rear, when broken or taken by furprize, and unformed, it was easily routed, and was calculated only for level ground, and the defence of a flation acceflible only in one direction.
The Roman legion could act on its front, its flank, or its rear. Each division, or manipule, and even the men that cornpofed it, could aft apart; and, if they hid space enough to ply their weapons, couJd fcarce be taken by furprize, or
be made to susser for want of a determinate order A  It was serviceable therefore, upon any ground, and, except on the front of the phalanx, had an un- doubted advantage over that body. In its ordinary form, the legton made its attack by separate divisions, at considerable intervals; and this mode of attack had a tendency to break and disjoin the front of the phalanx. The divisions of the second line were made to face the intervals of the firif, in order to take advantage of any order that might arise from the impreflion made on the enemy, whether they repulsed and pursued, or gave way to the divisions that attacked them. Such are the reasonings which occurred to mi- litary men, at least after the events of the present war. In the mean time the Romans, in whatever degree they comprehended this argument, had sus- ficient confidence in their own weapons, and in their loose order, to encounter the long spear and compaced force.of their enemy: When Flamininus arrived in Epirus, Philip ceived him in a rugged pass, where the A6us burfis from the mountains that separate Epirus from Thef- faly. This poll was strong, and could be  fended even by irregular troops; but the phalanx, in this place, had none of its peculiar advantages; the Romans got round it upon the heights, and obliged the king of Macedonia to retire. He fledU.  sss- through Thelfaly; and, to incommode the enemy in their attempts to pursue him, laid wafie the country as he passed. The flight of Philip determined the Etolians to take part in the war againfi him; and the Roman general, after the operations of the campaign, to winter in Phocis on the gulph of Corinth, found, that the greater part of the Achaean flates were likewise disposed to join him. He took  vantage of this disposition, and got possession of all the towns in the Peloponnefus, except Corinth
and 00 and Argos, which hitherto had been in alliance
with the enemy.
in the following spring, Philip, having with great industry colleEted and disciplined the forces of his kingdom, received Flamininus in Theflaly. The armies met in the neighbourhood of Phere; but the country, being interspersed with gardens, and cut with plantations and hedges, the king declined a battle and withdrew. Flamininus, knowing that he had magazines at Scotufa, supposed that he was gone towards that place, and followed by a route that was separated from that of the king by a ridge of hills. In the first day march, the Ro- mans and Macedonians were hid from each other by the heights; on the second day they were co- vered by a thick fog, which hindered them from feeing difiintly even the different parts of their own armies.
The scouts and advanced parties on both fides, had, about the fame time, ascended the heights to gain some observation of their enemy. They met by surprise, and could not avoid an engagement. Each party sent for support to the main body of their refpe.ive armies. The Romans had begun to give way, when a reinforcement arrived, that enabled them, in their turn, to press on the enemy, and to recover the height from which they had been forced. Philip was determined not to hazard his phalanx on that unfavourable ground, broken and interspersed with little hills; which, on ac- count of their figure, were called the Cynoce phale (1). He lent, nevertheless, all his horse and irregular infantry to extricate his advanced party, and to draw them off with honour. Upon their arrival, the advantage came to be on the of the Macedonians; and the Roman irregulars were forced from the hills in the utmost disorder. The , - .'i     :;, that  hills refemblSd the head Qs a dog.
cry
cry of victory was carried back to the camp of the A  king. His courtiers exclaimed, that now was the  time to urge a flying enemy, and to complete his advantage. The king hesitated; but could not resist the general voice. He ordered the phalanx to move; and he himself at the head of the right wing, while his left was marching in column, had arrived and formed on the hill. On his way to this ground, he was flattered with recent tracts of the victory which had been gained by his troops. Flamininus, at the fame time, alarmed at the defeat of his light infantry, and feeing a kind of panic likely to spread through the legions, put the whole army in motion, and advanced to receive his flying parties. In that point of time the fog cleared up and shewed the right of the Macedonian phalanx already formed upon the height. Flamininus hafiily attacked this body, and, being unable to make any impreflion, gave up the day, on that quarter for loft. But observing that the enemy opposite to his right were not yet come to their ground, he instantly repaired to that wing, and, with his elephants and light infantry, sup- ported by the legions, attacked them before the phalanx was formed, and put them to flight.
In this fate of the ation, a Tribune of the vic- torious legion, being advanced in pursuit of the enemy, as they fled beyond the flank of their own phalanx on the right, took that body in the rear; and, by this fortunate attempt, in so critical a mo- ment, completed the vitory in all parts of the field.
Thus Philip, if his phalanx had any advantage over the legion of the Romans, had not, in two successive encounters, been able to avail himfeif of it; and it may well be luppofed, that in the movements of armies, which often require them to adt on varieties of ground, the chances were greatly in favour of the more versatile body  .
(A) Polyb.  xvii,  az.
From o From this field the king of Macedonia fled with
_ a mind already dilpofed not to urge the fate of
the war any farther. He retired to-the passes of the mountains that surround the valley of Tempe, and from thence sent a message to the Roman ge- neral with overtures of peace.
It was a fortunate circumfsance in the manners and policy of the Romans, that the fame motives of ambition which urged the rulers of the slate to war, likewise, on occasion, inclined the leaders of armies to peace, made them admit from an enemy the firfi offers of fubmiflion, and embrace any terms on which they could for themselves lay claim to a triumph.
The prayer of the republic, in entering on a war, included three objects, safety, victory, and and enlargement of territory (1). Every general endeavoured to obtain these ends for his country; but, in proportion as he approached to the pletion of his wishes, he became jealous of his fuc- ceflor, and desirous to terminate the war before any other should come to snatch out of his hands the trophies he had won. This people ap- peated, therefore, on most occasions, willing to spare the vanquished, and went to extremities only by degrees, and urged by the ambition of successive leaders, who, each in his turn, wished to make some addition to the advantages previously gained to his country. At the fame time, the State, when furnished with a fair pretence for reducing a vince to subjection, made the most effectual ar- rangements to accomplish this purpose.
Flamininus, on the present occasion, encouraged the advances that were made to him by Philip, granted a cessation of arms, gave him an opportu- nity to continue his applications for peace at Rome, and forwarded the messenger whom he sent on this
(I)  Lb. xxxi. , business.
bufineft; The Senate, on beinginformed that the i A  king of Macedonia cast hinfelf entirely on the ,.'_, mercy and juitice of the Romans, named ten millioners to be joined with Flamininus, and tou. . 557. determine, in presence of the other parties cerned in the war, What were to be the terms on which peace should be granted. The time was not yet come for the Romans to lay hold of any poffeflions beyond the sea of lonia. They had passed into that country as the protecors of Athens, were now satisfied with the title of Deliverers of Greece; and, under pretence of set- ting the republics of that quarter free, detached them from the Macedonian monarchy; but, in this manner, made the firt ftep towards conquefl, by weakening their.enemy, and by: firippi.ng him .of great part of that power with which he had -beea able to resist them in the late war.
They obliged the king iof Madedonia 0to with- draw his garrisons from every fortress in Greece and to leave every Grecian city, whether of -Etn- rope or Asia, to the full enjoyment of its own dependence and separate laws.
To secure the effecs of this treaty, they obliged him to surrender all his ships of war, eXcept one galley, on which, it was saids were mounted fix- teen tier of oars, requiring a height above the wa- ter, and dimensions in every parts more fitted for ostentation than wieldinefs or use. They made him reduce his ordinary military efiablifhment to five hundred men, and forbade him entirely the use of elephants. Forthemfelves, they desired only to have the Roman captives restored, deserters delivered up, and a fum of one thousand talents to reimburse the expenceof the war  .
    xxxiii.  31' I. 0 By 0 By this treaty the Romans not only weakened
their enemy, but acquired great acceflions of putation and general confidence. They announced themselves as prote&ors of all free nations; and in this character took an ascendant, which, even over the states they had rescued from foreign ufur- pations, by degrees might rife into sovereignty and a formal dominion.
To give the greater solemnity to the gift of li- berty which they made to the Grecian ltates, they had this at of splendid munificence proclaimed at the Ifithmus of Corinth, in presence of great mul- titudes from every part of Greece met to solemnize the ordinary games; and, in return, were extolled by the flatterers of their power, or the dupes of their policy, as the common restorers of freedom to mankind.
The Romans hastened the completion of the treaty, by which they disarmed the king of Mace- donia, upon having received information, that An- tiochus, king of Syria, was in motion with a mighty force, and, without declaring his intentions, made fail towards Europe. This prince succeeded to the kingdom of Syria a few years before Ptolemy Phi- lopater began to reign in Egypt, or Philip in Greece; and was nearly of the fame age with tlofe princes. In his youth he waged war with the king- dom of Egypt for the poffeflion of the Calo-Syria, and with the Satraps or governors of his own vinces, who attempted to- render themselves inde- pendent, and to dismember his kingdom. His success in re-uniting all the members of his own monarchy, put him possession of a great empire, which reached from- the extremities of Armenia and Persia to Sardis and the seas of Greece. The fplen- dor of his fortunes procured him the title of Antio- chus the Great. The crown of Egypt had been, for some time, the principal objet of his jealousy and of his ambition. He had made an alliance with
Philip,
Philip, in which the common objet of the partiese A  was to avail themselves of the minority.of Ptolemy: .VL. but he was not aware; in times how.riuch.the king of Macedonia stood in need. of his support against the.Romans; or how much it was his interest to preserve that kingdom. as a barrier.againfi the croachments of an ambitious people; ;who now gan to dire& their views to the, East. . He  vanced,- however, though now too late, by the .coast of Asia to the.Hellefpont, with-a fleet and an army:rather deflined for observation, than :for. any decided- part in a war: which was. brought to a conclusion about the:time of his arrival in those parts. . .. At Lyfimachia, the Roman deputies, who were charged. with the adjufiment and execution of the late treaty, met with Antiochus, and. tem.onfirated against some of his proceedings on the coast of Asia,; as affecting the possessions both of.Philip:and of Ptolemy. They complained of his present vafion of Europe with a hofiile force,  The Ro- . mans, they said, had rescued the Greeks from  Philip, not to deliver them over to Antiochus. They demanded a restitution of all the towns he had taken from Ptolemy, and enjoined him to refrain from any attempts on the freedom of Greece,
To there remonfirances and requisitions the king of Syria with scorn replied. That he knew the extent of his rights, and was not to be taught by the Romars: that they were busy in setting bounds to the ambition of other states, but set no bounds to their own; advised them to confine their views to the affairs of Italy, and to leave those of Asia to the parties concerned.
During the conferences which were held on these fubjets, each of the parties, without communi- cating what they heard to the others, received a report of the death of Ptolemy, the. infant king of
0 2 Egypt; 0o Egypt; and they separated from each other, , tent on the evils to be apprehended, or the benefits to be reaped, from this event.
This report, in which both parties were soon after undeceived, occasioned the return of Antio. chus into Syria, and suspended for some time the war which he was disposed to carry into Eu. rope  .
Under pretence of observing the motions of this prince, the Romans, although they had professed an intention to evacuate the'Greek cities, till kept poffeflion of Demetrias, a convenient sea-port in Theifaly, and of Chalcis on the straits of Eubaea; and Flamininus, under pretence of refiraining the violence of Nabis, the tyrant of Lacedemon, and of reitoring the tranqiuillity of that country (a), fill remained with an army in the Peloponnefus.
While the Romans were carrying their fortunes with so high a hand in this part of the world, and defeating armies hitherto deemed invincible, they received a considerable check in Spain.
That country had been recently divided into two provinces; and, though now possessed by the Romans, without the competition of any foreign rival, it continued to be held by a very difficult and precarious tenure, that of force, opposed to the impatience and continual revolts of a fierce and numerous people.
Spain had already furnished to Italy its principal supplies of silver and gold. At every triumph ob- tained in that country, the precious metals were brought in considerable quantities to the treasury of Rome; but were purchased for the most part with the blood of her legions, and led her into a fuccef- sion of wars, in which she experienced defeat as well as viatory. About the time that Flamininus had terminated the war in Macedonia; the ()   xxxiii.  41.     43.
consul
consul Sempronius, in the nearer province ofc A  Spain, was defeated with the loss of many officers VL. of rank. He himself was wounded in the aCtion, and soon after died.
Even the Roman possessions in Italy were not yet fully recovered from the troubles that had arisen in the time of the late war with Carthage. The Gaulish nations on the Po still continued in a fRate of hoffility. The slaves, of which the numbers had greatly increased in Etruria, and other. parts of the country, being moilly captives taken from enemies enured to arms and to violence, interrupt- ther servitude with frequent and dangerous furrecions. Having persons among them, who had been accustomed to command as well as to obey, they often deserted from their masters, form- into regular bodies, and encountered the armies of the republic in battle  .
The ridge of the Appenines beyond the confines of Etruria and the Roman frontier, fill harboured fierce and numerous tribes known by the name of Ligurians and Gauls, who not only often and long defended their own mountains and woods, but likewise frequently invaded the territory of the Ro- mans. Here, or in Spain, during the recess of other wars, there was a continual service for the Consuls and Praetors, and a continual exercise to the legions. The State, nevertheless, though still occupied in this manner with petty enemies and desultory wars, never loft fight of the great objects of itsjealoufy, from whom were to be apprehend- a more regular opposition, and better concerted designs against its power. Among these, the Car- thaginians were not likely to -continue longer at peace than until they recovered their firength, or had the profpet of some powerful support. Anti- ochus, possessed of all the resources of Asia, was
    xxviii.  36,
ready ready to join with this or any other slate that was
._ inclined to check the advancement of the Roman
power.   538. About a year after the conclusion of the war
with Philip, the Romans received intelligence, that the Carthaginians had entered into a correspond- ence with Antiochus; and as their supposed impla- cable enem. Hannibal, was then in one of the first offices of Itate at Carthage, it was not doubt-  that the secret intrigues of those parties were hostile to Rome. It was determined, therefore, to fend a proper commission into Africa, under pretence of an amicable mediation, in some ferences that fubfifed between Massinissa and the people of Carthage; but with injuntions to the commiffloners to penetrate, if possible, the designs of the Carthaginians; and, if necessary, to demand that Hannibal, the supposed author of a dangerous conspiracy againfi the peace of both the republics, should be delivered up.
This great man, from the termination of the late war, had acquitted himself in the political  partments, to which he had been appointed, with an integrity and ability worthy of his high reputa- as a soldier; but his reformations in a corrupt- state had procured him enemies at home, not less dangerous than those he had encountered abroad (q). Upon the arrival of the Roman  puties, he fufpe that the commission regarded himself, and made no doubt that a facion whose ambition he had restrained, and many particular persons whom he had recently incensed by the formation of certain abuses in which they were terefled, would gladly seize that opportunity to rid themselves of a powerful enemy, and from fear or some other motives, prevail on a corrupted pea- pie to deliver him up to the Romans. It is said,
(q   xxxiii.  46.-4.
that
that he had been long prepared for an emergencec A  of this fort, and, without any embarrassment, ap- peared upon the arrival of these messengers, in all the funcions of his public character; 'but at night withdrew to the coatl, and set fail for Asia  . He was received by Antiochus at Ephesus, and treated as a person worthy to direA the councils of a great king; an office too much exposed to envy for the favourites of a court, or even for the prince himself long to endure.
From this time forward the king of Syria, sup- posed to be governed by the counsels of Hannibal, became the principal obje& of attention and of jealousy at Rome; and though he seemed to main in tranquillity during about three years after the acquisition of this formidable counsellor, yet it was notdoubted that the first violent storm was to burRt from that quarter.
Flamininus had, during the greater part of this interval, remained in Greece; had been occupied in fettling the affairs of that country, and in ob- serving the Etolians, who, being dissatisfied with the late peace, endeavoured to raise a spirit of content against the Romans. He made war at the fame time against Nabis the tyrant of Lacedemon; and though he failed in his attempt to force this fa- mous usurper in his own capital, he obliged him to evacuate Argos, and to cede all his possessions on the coast. By these means he removed all the dangers with which any of the States of the Achaan league had been threatened, and restored them to the full poffeflion of their freedom.
To leave no ground of jealousy or distrust in Greece, Flamininus persuaded the Roman missioners to evacuate Demetrias, Chalcis, and Corinth, which they were disposed to retain in the profpe& of a war with Antiochus; and having
    xxxiii.  46-49.
thus oo thus concluded the affairs that were entrufled to
.him, he returned into Italy, and made his entry at Rome in a triumphal proceflion, which lasted three days, with a splendid dilplay of spoils, captives, and treasure  .
All the troubles of Greece, at the departure of Flamininus, seemed to be composed; there ap- pearances, however, were but of short duration. Nabis was impatient under his late concessions; and flattering himself that the Romans would not repass the sea merely to exclude him from the pof- feflion of a few places of little consequence on the coast of the Peloponnefus, began to employ infi- nuation, corruption, and open force, in order to recover the towns he had loft. In this design he was encouraged by the Etolians, who flattered him with the hopes of support, not only from them- selves, but likewise from Antiochus, and even from Philip; all of whom had an evident interest in pressing the growing power of the Italian republic. The Etolians had expected, at the close of the war with Philip, to come into the place of that prince, as the head of all the Grecian confederacies, and to have a principal (hare in the spoils of his king- dom. They urged the Roman cormmiir.oners to the final fuppreflion of that monarchy; and, being disappointed in all their hopes, complained of the Romans, as bestowing upon others the fruits of a victory which had been obtained chiefly by their means, and as having, under the pretence of set- ting the Greeks at liberty, reduced that country into a weak and disjointed itate, which might in any future period render it an easy prey to them- selves.
Flamininus accordingly had, in all his measures for the settlement of Greece, found from this peo- ple a warm and obfiinate resistance. He found
(:) i.   xxxiy.  5.
themr.
them endeavouring to form a powerful confede- A  racy againit the Romans, and for this purpose en-_ -. gaged in intrigues with Nabis, Philip, and Antio- chus; applying to each of them in terms suited to the supposed injuries they had severally received in the late war, or in the negotiations that followed. At the conclusion of the peace with Philip, An- tiochus thinking himself by the effecs of that treaty aggrieved, in refpeE to the freedom granted to tome cantons in Thrace, on which he derived a claim from his ancestors, sent an embassy to Rome with remonfirances on that fubjeEt. The Romans made answer, In the capacity which they had as- fumed of the deliverers of Greece, that they would oppose every attempt to enslave any Grecian set- tlement; and as they had no designs on Asia, they expected that the king of Syria would not inter- meddle in the concerns of Europe. While they gave this answer to the Ambassador of Antiochus, they resolved, under pretence of treating with the king, to fend commilfioners, in their turn, to ob- serve his motions.
The famous Scipio Africanus is mentioned by some hifiorians as having been of this commission, and as having had some conversations with Hanni- bal, which are recorded to the honour of both. Livy, however, seems to reject there particulars as fabulous, while he admits that the apparent inti- macy of Hannibal with the Roman commiflioners, very much diminilhed the part which this for- midable counsellor held in the confidence of the king  .
At this time it became known that Antiochus was meditating the invasion of Italy as well as of Greece; that the firfi of these objects was to be committed to Hannibal, who undertook to prevail on the republic of Carthage to take a principal
    sxxv.  14.
share o share in the war; and that, for this purpose, he had
sent a proper person to concert measures with his party at Carthage; but the intrigue being discover.  the Carthaginians, in order to exculpate them- selves, sent an account of it to Rome.
Before this intelligence had been received, the Roman commissioners were set out for Asia, and, according to their inftrutions, passed through Per- gamus to consult with Eumenes the sovereign of that kingdom, who, having reason to dread the power of Antiochus, employed all his credit to en- gage the Romans in a war with that prince. They had an audience of the king of Syria at Apamea, and a conference afterwards, on the objet of their commiflion, with a principal officer of his court at Ephesus. This minister made no scruple to charge the Romans with the real designs of ambition, which they endeavoured to disguise under the tence of procuring the liberties of Greece.  Your  conduct, he said,  where you are in condition to ac without disguise, is a much better evidence of your intention, than any profelflons you may think proper to make in Greece or in Asia, where, by assuming a popular character, you have so many parties to reconcile to your interest. Are not the inhabitants of Naples and of Rhegium Greeks, as well as those of Lampafcus and"
"Smyrna ? You are extremely desirous to set the  Greeks at liberty from the dominion of Antiochus  and Philip, but have no remorse in fubjeting  them to your own."
"The deputies of the cities whose interest was in question were present at there conferences, and each pleaded the cause of his country, but without any other effect than that of convincing the parties cerned, that a war could not long be avoided. The Romans, alarmed by the intelligence received from Carthage during the dependance of this conference, 'Iad already begun to prepare for hostilities: and,"
"upon"
"upon the report of their commissioners from Afia A  fiill continued to augment their forces by sea and by  land. Under pretence of repressing the violences committed by Nabis, they ordered one army into Greece, and fationed a second on the coast of Cala- bria and Apulia, in order to support the operations of the first. The Romans had reason to confider the Etolians as enemies, and even to diflruft the intentions of many of the republics lately restored to their liber- ty, who began to surmise, that, under the pretence of being relieved from the dominion of Philip, they were actually reduced to a state of dependence on Rome. To obviate the difficulties which from these fur- mises might arise among the Grecian republics, the Roman Senate sent a fresh commission into that country, requiring those who were named in it to at under the direction of Flamininus, the late  liverer of Greece. These commiflioners found the principal cities of that country variously affected: a general meeting of the States being called to ceive them at Demetrias, they were, by some of the parties present at this meeting, reproached with a design, under pretence of restoring the Greeks to their liberties, of separating them from every power that was fit to protect them; and they were likewise reproached with a design of efiablifhing their own tyranny, under pretence of opposing that of every other State."
"This species of blasphemy, uttered against a power which the majority of those who were sent affected to revere, railed a great ferment in the council; and the persons who had thus ventured to insult the Romans being threatened with violence, were forced to withdraw from Demetrias, and to take refuge in Etolia. The remaining deputies of Greece endeavoured to pacify the Roman pilfioners, or at leaf entreated them that they"
"would"
"B would not impute to so many different nations,"
"what was no more than the frenzy of a few indivi. duals."
"The Etolians had already invited Antiochus to pass into Europe. The measure was accordingly under deliberation in the council of this prince. Hannibal warmly recommended the invasion of Italy as the most effectual blow that could be itruck at the Romans.  At home, he said,  their  force is still composed of disjoint materials, which  will break into pieces when assailed by the im.  mediate touch of an enemy; and the most es-  fecual power that can be raised up against
them, is that which may be formed from the ruins of their own empire. But if you allow them to remain in quiet poffeflion of Italy, and to firetch  out the arms of that country to a distance, their  resources are endless, and their tfrength irrefifli-  ble. He made an offer of himself for this ser- vice, demanding a hundred gallies, ten thousand foot, and a thousand horse. With this armament he proposed to present himself on the coafi of Africa, and, from what further reinforcements or supplies he could derive from Carthage, to effe& his descent upon Italy.
These councils, however, were given in vain. Hannibal, as a person likely to reap all the glory of every service in which he bore any part, was come an object of jealousy to the court of Antio- chus, and to the king himself. His advice being received with more aversion than refpet, served to determine the king against every measure he posed.  Such a monarch, it was said by the courtiers,  could not be under any neceflity to  employ foreign aid or direction :---his own force
was sufficient to overcome the Romans in any part of the world :---the recovery of Greece must be the si.ft object of his arms :--the people ' of that country, whenever his galleys appeared,
' wold"
".( would crowd to the shores to receive him:-the A  the Etolians were already in arms for this pur-  ' pofe:-Nabis was impatient to recover the pof-  feflions of which he had been itripped by the  Romans:-Philip must eagerly fly to his fland-  ard, and embrace every opportunity to revenge  the indignities which had been lately put upon himself and his kingdom  ."
"Flattered with these expectations, Antiochus set fail for Europe with ten thousand foot, some ele   5s; phants, and a body of ho-se. He was received at Demetrias with acclamations of joy; but soon as- ter, in the feqiel, came to understand that his al- lies in that country had sent for him to bear the burden of the war, and were devising how they fhoiuld' reap for tihemfelves tle 'advantages that might be mtade to ~arise from it."
"The Etolians, at whose ihfiance Antiochus had come iiro Greeee, were still divided. One party among them contended for peace, and alleged that the resence of the king of Syria was a fortu- hate ci'rcumftance,:as it might give them an op- portunity to negoiate with greater advantage. Another party contended for immediate war; sising, that force alone could obtain any equi- table -terms froim such a party as that they had to do with. ;"
"Flanlininus was prefiet -in the assembly of Etolia when thee edebates took place relating to the refo- lution for peace or war with the Romans. He ob- served to the party who contended for war, that, before they proceeded to this extremity, they ought to have made their representations at Rome, and to have waited for an answer from thence. We shall make our representations, and demand  our a'nswer, said a principal person in the assem- bly, still thinking of a descent upon Italy, to be
    xxxv.  rS & 42.
effeAed o effected by Hannibal,  perhaps where we are lealt"
"L expected, on the banks of the Tiber  . - ' The resolution for war with the Romans was ac-"
"cordingly taken in this assembly, and Antiochus was declared head of the confederacy to be formed for mutual support in the conduc of it. This prince endeavoured to obtain a declaration to the fame effe& from the Achaans and Beotians; bet being disappointed in his application to those States, he left part of his forces at Demetrias, and he him. self having negociated his admission at Chalcis on the Straits of Euboea, retired, as if he had come to aft upon the defensive, behind the Euri- pus, and eftablilhed his court at that place for the winter."
"Mean time the Romans prepared themselves as for a ltruggle of great difficulty, and probably of long duration  . They confidered the abilities of Hannibal, employed to conduc the forces of Asia, as a sufficient ground of alarm. Their sirss object was to guard Italy and their other poffeffi- ons. An army of observation was for this purpose stationed at Tarentum. A numerous fleet wasor- dered to protect the coast. The Pretors and other officers of State, with proper forces under their command, had charge of the different difiricts of Italy that were fufpeated of inclining to the enemy, or of being difaffeaed to the commonwealth. The initrutions given to there officers, were to observe what was pafling in the several quarters to which they were sent, but to avoid every occasion of ani- mofity or tumult that might open a way for the  minion of an enemy, or shew an invader where to diret his attack."
"Having made there dispositions for their own fe. curity, they proceeded to form an army which was to act offensively, and to fix the scene of the war in"
"    xxxv.  33.   Appian Syriaca,  95."
"their"
"their enemy country. Baebius, a Praetor of the A  preceding year, under pretence of opposing Na-  . his, who had renewed the war in the Peloponnefus, had already passed into Epirus with a considerable force. Acilius Glabrio, one of the Consuls of the present year, to whose lot this province had fallen, was underflood to have in charge the farther parations that were making for a war in that coun- try, and hatiened the assembling of an army and fleet sufficient to disconcert the measures of the par- ties that were fuppcfed to be forming against the Romans."
"The usual tithes of corn were ordered from Sar- dinia, and double tithes from Sicily, to supply the army in Epirus. Commiffaries likewise were sent to Carthage and Numidia, in order to purchase supplies from thence. And with such a sense of its importance did the Romans enter on this war, that the Consul Cornelius issued an edi&, prohibit- all Senators, and all those who were intitled to be admitted into the Senate, to absent themselves from Rome above one day at a time, and requiring that no more than five Senators should on the fame day be absent from the city."
"The equipment of the fleet was retarded by a dispute that arose with eight of the maritime colo- nies or sea-ports, who pretended to a right of ex- emption from the present service. But their plea, upon an appeal to the Tribunes, and a reference from them to the Senate, was over-ruled."
"Antiochus passed the winter at Chalcis in a man- ner too common with princes of a mean capacity, who put every matter of personal caprice on the fame footing with the affairs of State. Being en- amoured of a Grecian beauty, he employed the attention of his court on feafis and proceflions,  vised for her entertainment, and to enhance hia pleasures. His reputation declined, and his"
"forces"
"B 0 forces made no progress either in numbers or dif-"
"aI cipline."
"In the spring he loft some time in forming federacies with petty States, which are ever under the neceflity of declaring themselves for the vailing power, and who change their with the reverses of fortune. Having traversed the country from Beotia to Acamania, negotiating treaties with such allies as these, he had passed into Thessaly, and had besieged Lariffa, when the Roman Prator gan to advance from Epirus."
"After the contending parties had thus taken the field, and the armies of Rome and of Syria were about to decide the superiority on the frontiers of Macedonia, Philip seemed to remain in fufpence, having yet made no open declaration to which he inclined. He had felt the arms of the Romans, and had reason to dread those of Aritiochus."
"The princes who divided the Macedonian em- pire were not only rivals in power, they were in some degree mutual pretenders to the thrones which they severally occupied; Philip, probably confidering Antiochus, in this capacity, as the principal object of his jealousy, took his resolution to declare for the Romans; and having according- ly joined the Prator on the confines of Thessaly, their vanguard advanced to observe the pofi- and motions of the enemy."
"Antiochus, upon the juntion of these forces, thought proper to raise the siege of Lariffa. From this time forward he seemed to have dropped all his sanguine expe&ations of conquest in Europe, was contented to act on the defensive, and when the Roman Consul arrived in Epirus, and directed his march towards Thessaly, he took post at the Straits of Thermopyla, intending to shut up this palfage into Greece; but being dislodged from thence, his army was routed, the greater part of it perished in the flight, and he himself, with no"
"more"
"more than five hundred men, escaped to Chalcis, A  his former retreat in Euboea, from whence he soon vl after set fail for Asia. Upon the flight of Antiochus, the Etolians alone remained in the predicament of open enemies to the Romans. They were yet extremely irrefohlte and diltrated in their councils. After having brought the king of Syria into Europe, they -had not supported him with a sufficient force; aud-now, upon his departure, being sensible of their danger from the Romans, a powerful enemy whom they had greatly provoked, they endeavoured to per- fuade the king to return,;: representing to him how much he was concerned to. furnish that arrogant people with a sufficient occupation in Greece, to prevent their. pafling into Asia.. They at the fame time made offers of pacification and of fubmifion to the Romans, but were feceived in a mainer, which gave them no hopes of being able to palliate the offence they had given. The Consul advanced into their country, laid siege to Naupatus, and having reduced that place and the whole nation to great distress, agreed to a cessation of arms, only while they sent deputies to Rome to implore forgiveness and to make their peace with the Se- nate. Such was the posture of affairs when Lucius Cornelius Scipio, being eleced one of the Consuls for the ensuing year, was destined to succeed Acilius Glabrio in Etolia; and, with his bro- ther Publius, the victor in the battle of Zama, who was to as second in command, had orders to prosecute the war againfi the kingdom or Syria. These leaders being arrived in Greece, and intent on the removal of the war into Asia, willingly ac- cepted of the submission of all the towns that had incurred any suspicion during the flay of Antiochus in Europe; and leaving the difference which mained to be fettled with the Etolians in a slate otf"
"VOL. I. negociation,"
"B negociation, they proceeded without delay, by"
"the route of Macedonia and Thrace, towards the Hellespont."
"In pafling through these countries, they were conducted and furnished with all the necessary sup. plies of provisions and carriages by Philip."
"The fleets of Asia and Europe, during this :march of the Roman army, contended for the command of the seas. That of Europe, which was joined by the navy of Rhodes, and even by that of the Carthaginians, who, to vindicate them- selves from any blame in the pretent war, had -taken part with their rival, after various encoun- ters, obtained the viEtory in a decisive battle, which made them entire masters of the sea, and opened all the ports of Asia to the shipping of the Romans. -"
"The king of Syria had fortified Sestos and Aby- dos on the Hellespont, and -Lyfimachia on the isthmus of Cherfonefus, with an apparent refolt- to dispute the march and palfage of the Scipios at all these different fiations. But on the total  feat of his navy, he either confidered those places as loft, or, fearing to have his forces separately cut off in attempting to defend them, he withdrew his garrisons from Lyfimachia, Sestos, and Abydos; and while he thus opened the way for his enemies . to reach him, gave other. signs of despondency, or of a disposition to fink under' adversity, making overtures of peace, and offering to yield every point which he had formerly disputed in the war. In reply to these offers he was told, That he must do a great deal more; that he must submit to such terms as the Romans were intitled to expect from victory. Bat as he continued to assemble his forces, he chore rather to flake his fortune on the :decilion of a battle; and having in vain endea- voured to make himself master of Pergamus, the :-apital of Eumenes, he fell back on Thyatira, and"
"**~~~-- .-~ ~from"
"from thence proceeded to take post on the moun A  tains of Sypylus, where he meant to contend for . the empire of Asia. In the mean time the Scipios advanced to the Hellespont, and without any refinance passed the Strait. This was the first time that any Roman army set foot on Asia; and being met by the  puties of the king with the overtures of peace that have been mentioned, sent accounts to Rome of their arrival; and made a halt for some days."
"This descent was confidered by the Romans as an epoch of great renown; and the messenger who brought the accounts of it was received with processions and solemn rites. Supplications and prayers were offered up to the gods, that this firit landing of a Roman army in Asia might be prof- perous for the comrnonwealth.  . 561."
"Publius Scipio, the famous antagonist of Han- nibal, soon after his arrival in Asia, was taken ill; or, what may be supposed for his honour, being desirous not to rob his brother of any share in the glory which he perceived was to be easily won againfi the present enemy, he affected indisposition, and remained at a distance from the camp. Lu- cius, thus left alone to command the Roman army, advanced upon the king, attacked him in the polt he had chosen, and, in a decisive vitory, perfed the splendid forces of Asia, with 'all their apparatus of armed chariots, horses, and elephants, harnessed with gold."
"The king himself fled with a few attendants, passed through Sardis in the night, and continued his flight to Apamea in Pifidia, where he expected to be out of the reach of his pursuers."
"Thyatira, Sardis, and Magnesia soon after opened their gates to the Romans; and the king himself by a messenger from Apamea, again made haste to own himself vanquished, and to sue for peace."
"P2 The"
"B o The Romans, to display a moderation which"
"_ they frequently affected in the midst of their vic."
"tores, renewed the fame conditions which they had prescribed on their arrival in Asia; and a cessation of arms being granted, officers from Antiochus, and from all the other parties concerned in the approaching treaty, repaired to Rome, in order to receive the final decision of the Senate and People, on the future fettlernent of their affairs."
"Eumenes, the king of Pergamus, on this occa- sion, attended in person, and, together with the republic of Rhodes, who had distinguished them- selves by their zeal and faithful services in the late war, became the principal gainer in the treaty."
"It was agreed by the Senate, that the prelimi. nary articles already prescribed by the Consul flould be confirmed:"
"That, according to there articles, Antiochus should resign all his pretensions in Europe, and contract the boundaries of his kingdom in Asia within the mountains of Taurus:"
"That he should pay to the Romans, at successive terms, five thousand talents to reimburse the ex- pence of the war:"
"To Eumenes four hundred talents on the score of a debt that had been due to his father."
"And, for the performance of these conditions, Mould give twenty hostages, such as the Romans should name."
"In the farther execution of this treaty, the Ro- mans again appeared to be solicitous only for the interest of their allies, and required no more than indemnification for themselves. They appointed ten commissioners to repair into Asia, and there to determine the several questions that might arise lating to the settlement of that country. In the mean time they published to all parties the follow- inftrutions, as the basis on which the commis- fioners were to proceed:"
"That"
"That the preliminaries of the peace with Anti- A  ochus already offered should be ratified: vl. That all the provinces which he was to evacuate, except Caria and Lycia, were to be afligned to Eumenes:"
"That there provinces, bounded by the Meander on the east, should be given to the republic of Rhodes; That all the Greek cities which had been tri- butary to Eumenes should continue so, and all which had been tributary to Antiochus should be set free  . A settlement was accordingly soon after made in Asia in these terms; and the Romans, while they were haitening to universal dominion, appeared to have no object beyond the prosperity of their allies: they were merciful to the vanquished, and formidable only to those who presumed to resist their arms. In the midst of their conquests, they reserved nothing to themselves betides the power of giving away entire kingdoms and provinces; or, in other words, they reserved nothing but the power of seizing the whole at a proper time, and for the present, the supreme ascendant over all the conquered provinces that were given away, and over those who received them. The Etolians were now the only parties in Greece who pretended to hold their liberties, or their possessions, by any other tenure than that of a grant from the Romans."
"During the dependance of the war in Asia, the Etolians were making continual efforts to recover their own losses, and to preserve the city of Am- bracia, then besieged by the Romans; but, upon the defeat of Antiochus, the Ambraciots furren- dered at discretion, and the Etolians rued for peace."
"  Polyb. Excerpa Legationes,  35."
"Ambracia"
"B o Ambracia had been the capital of Pyrrhus, and"
"I. now furnished the captor with a plentiful spoil of --- fatues, pictures, and other ornaments to adorn
his triumph. The Etolians, at the intercession of the Athenians, were allowed to hope for peace on the following terms (a).
That they should not allow to pass through their country the troops of any nation at war with the Romans:
That they should confider the allies of Rome as their allies, and the enemies of Rome as their enemies:
That they should make instant payment of two hundred talents in silver, the standard of Athens; and of three hundred more at separate infialments within fix years:
That if they chore to make there payments in gold rather than silver, the proportion should be one of gold to ten of silver; and that they should give hollages for the performance of there several articles  .
While the Etolians were on there terms conclud- a peace, or rather obtaining a pardon, the Confil Manlius, who had succeeded the Scipios in Asia, willing, if possible, to bring back into Italy, together with the victorious legions, some pretence of a triumph for himself, led his army against the Galatians. These were the descendants of a bar- barous horde, which had, some ages before, mi- grated from the north of Europe, visited Italy and Greece in their way, and flopped on the Halys in the Lesser Asia, where they made a settlement, round which they levied contributions quite tothe Ihores of the Euxine, the Mediterranean, and Eu- gean Seas. Their forces had lately made a part in the army of Antiochus, and they had not yet acceded to the peace which that prince had ac-
(.) Polyb. Ercerpt; Legationes,  l8.   
cepted.
cepted. By there means they furnished the Ro A  man Consul with a pretence for invading their . country; and being unable to resist him, sub- - mitted at discretion. In thus extinguishing the mains of every hostile combination, the Romans took care to satisfy the world that it never was safe to take part against them in any confederacy, and that, while they never abandoned any ally of their own, they were in condition to compel the powers, with whom they were at war, frequently to aban- don theirs. Thus ended the first expedition of the Romans into Asia; in the result of which, without seeming to enlarge their own dominions, they had greatly reduced the powers both of the Syrian and Macedonian monarchies; and by restoring, whe- ther from inclination or policy, every State to its independence, they had balanced a multi- tude of parties against each other, in such a manner, as that no formidable combination was likely to be formed against themselves; or if any one, or a few parties, should presume to with- stand their power, many others were ready to join in the cry of ingratitude, and to treat any op- position that was made to them as an unworthy turn to those who had so generously espoused the cause of mankind.
The pacification of Asia and Greece left the public at leisure to manage its ordinary quarrels with nations unfubdued on the opposite frontier. In the well, hostilities had subsisted without inter- ruption, during the whole time that the State was intent on its wars in the East , and triumphal cessions were exhibited by turns from those opposite quarters.
In Spain the commanders were, for the most part, annually relieved, and the army annu- ally recruited from Italy. The variety of events which are mentioned, and the continuance of
the o : the war itself are sufficient to evince that no
' decisive victories were obtained, or conquefis ,-'-- finally made. On the coast of Spain there were
many Greek or African settlements established for commerce. Of there the Romans, either as having supplanted the Carthaginians, former. ly their masters, or as having subdued the na- tives, were fill in poffeflion. But the interior parts of the country were occupied by many hordes, who appear to have been colleted in townships and fortified flations, from which they aflembled to oppose the Roman armies in the field, or in which they defended themselves with obstinate valour. Though often defeated, they still renewed the contest. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, in the year of Rome five hundred and feventy-four, about ten years after the peace with Antiochus, is said to have received the fubmilion of one hundred and three towns of that country  . The troubles of Spain were nevertheless, renewed under his fuccefors, and continued to occupy the Roman arms with a petition of similar operations, and a like variety of events.
The war in Liguria was nearly of the fame description with that in Spain; continued still to occupy a certain part of the Roman force; and, both before and after the late expedition to Greece and Asia, was for some years the prin- cipal employment of both the Consuls. Here, however, the Romans made a more sensible progress towards an entire conquelt than they made in Spain. They facilitated their accels to the country by highways across the moun- tains; they reduced the numbers of the enemy by the sword and by the ordinary difireffes of aar; and, after the experience of many (:)   Iib. Cl. . 50, & paflim
tended
tended submissions, and repeated revolts of that A  people, who seemed to derive the ferocity of  their spirit, as. well as the security of their pofleflion, from the rugged and inacceflible na- ture of their country, it was determined to tranf- plant the natives to some of the more acceflible parts of Italy,- where the lands, being waite from the effect, of former wars, were Iill unoccupied and at the disposal of the republic  .  .   xl.  18, A  A  State of Italy.-Charafler of the Roman Policy,.
Death of Scipio and of Hannibal.-Indulgence of the Romans to the King of Macedonia.-Complaints againfi Philip.-Succeffion of Per eus, and Origin of the Ytar.--Alion on the Peneus.-Overtture of Peace.-Progrefs of the ar.-Defeat of Per. feus at Pidna, by Pauius Emilius.-His Flight and Captivity.-Settlement of Macedonia and Illyricum. -AManners of the Romans. BOO the methods above related the Romans DJ proceeded to extend their dominion over all
the diliricts around them, and either brought to their own fiandard, or disarmed, the several nati- ons who had hitherto resifted their power. While they were about to accomplish this end, the Tranf- alpine Gauls, itill having their views direted to the southward of the mountains, made rome attempts at migration into Italy, in one of which they fettled a party of their people at Aquileia. The Romans wvere alarmed, and ordered there firangers to be difiodged and reconduaed across the Alps.
This circumfiance suggested the design of fe- curing the frontier on that by a colony; and for this purpose a body of Latins was accordingly sent to Aquileia, a settlement which nearly pleted the Roman establishments within the Alps. The country was now, in a great measure, occu- pied by colonies of Roman and Latin extraftion, who, depending on Rome for protection, served, wherever they were fettled, to carry the deepest impreflions of her authority, and to keep the na- tives in a hiate of fubjecion to her government.
The
The domestic policy of the State, during thisc A  period, appears to have been orderly and wife Vl. yond that of any other time. The diftintion  tween Patrician and Plebeian was become altoge- ther nominal. The descendants of those who had held the higher offices of Rate, were, in consequence of the preferments of their ancestors, confidered as noble. niftead of a title of nobility, the son named his father and grandfather, who had been vested with public honours. And as the Plebeians now found no difficulty in obtaining the offices of State, they were continually opening the way of their poflerity to the rank of Nobles.  Thus I, said Decius Mus, while he pleaded to have the priest- hood (a), joined to the other honours which the different orders of the People enjoyed in common, can cite my father in the rank of Consul; and my ton can cite both his grandfather and me  . The Plebeians were intitled by law to claim one of the Consul feats, and frequently oc- cupied both."
"The authority of the Senate, the dignity of the Equestrian Order, and the manners of the People in general, were guarded, and, in a great mea- sure, preserved, by the integrity and firit exercise of the Censorial power. The wifefi and the molt refpeted of the citizens, from every condition, were raised into office; and the assemblies, whether of the Senate, or the People, without envy, and without jealousy, suffered themselves to be go- verned by the counsels of a few able and virtuous men. It is impoflible otherwise to account for that lendor with which the affairs of this republic, from the time of the first Punic war to that of the last wars with Macedonia and Carthage, though committed to hands that were continually chang-"
"(a) Vid.  i.  3.       8."
"ing,"
"B  were, nevertheless, uniformly and ably con."
"c. ducaed. -.'.. The spirit of the People was in a high degree"
"democratical; and though they suffered themselves to be governed by the silent influence of personal authority in a few of their citizens, yet could not endure any species of uncommon pre-eminence; even that which arose from the lustre and well- founded pretensions of dilinguifhed merit."
"The great Scipio, with his brother Lucius, on their return from Asia, encountered a prosecution, unworthily supported by a popular clamour; which brought them to trial on a formal charge of secret- part of the treasure received from Antiochus. It is likely, from the manner in which Publius Sci- pio disdained to answer this charge, that he carried his personal spirit too high for democratical govern- ment, which can allow no private merit to come in competition with the rights of the people to so. vereignty, and of individuals to equal attention in the State. At his firfl citation on the libel which was brought against him, teeming not to hear the person who accused him, he reminded the people, that this was the anniversary of that day on which they had gained the victory at Zama; and desired that they would follow him to the temples, in which he was to return thanks to the Gods for that important event. He was followed accordingly by :he whole multitude, and the accuser for that time was deserted. At his second citation, he called for !he paper of accounts, on which he had entered all the unms he had received in Asia; and, while the people expected, that he was to satisfy them by a slate of particulars, he tore the scroll in their tence; and, taking the privilege of a Roman citi- zen, retired, without deigning to give any answer, and went as an exile into a country village of Italy, where he soon after died."
"The"
"The fame year likewise terminated the life ofc A  his antagonist Hannibal. This great man, him-  self a sufficient objet of jealousy to nations, was, by an article in the late treaty of peace with Anti- ochus, to have been delivered up to the Romans; and had, in order to avoid that danger, retired into Crete. From thence he took refuge with Prufias, king of Bythinia, where the enmity of Rome fRill pursued him, and where an embafly was .ent to demand that he should be delivered up. As soon as he knew that this demand was actually made, and that the avenues to his dwelling were secured in order to seize him, he took poison, and died. The Romans had been so well satisfied with the part which was taken by Philip in the late war with Antiochus, that they released his son Demetrius, then at Rome, an hostage for payment of the fa- ther tribute, of which they likewise remitted a part. They even connived at his recovering some of his former possessions, and made no inquiry into the numbers of his troops, in which he greatly ex- ceeded the establishment prescribed by the last treaty. They continued in this disposition during four years after the late peace with the king of Sy- ria; and, in this interval, permitted the kingdom of Macedonia, by the improvement of its revenue, and the increase of its people, in a great measure to recover its former firength. These circumstances of prosperity, however, did not fail to excite apprehension in the minds of all those who, holding independent possessions in that neighbourhood, were exposed to be the first victims of this reviving power; and reprefentati- ons, to awaken the attention of the Romans on this fubjecl, were accordingly made at Rome, from Eumenes, the king of Pergamus, and from all the petty princes and small communities on the frontier of Macedonia."
"On"
"B o On receiving there admonitions,'the Senate, in"
"I. their usual form, sent to the country from whence"
"-they were alarmed a select number of their mem-"
"bers to make inquiry into the real slate of affairs. Before a tribunal thus contfituted, the king of Ma- cedonia was cited to appear as a private party, first at Tempe, to answer the charge of the Theflalians, and afterwards at Theffalonica, to answer that of Eumenes. After a difcufiion, sufficiently humbling to a sovereign, he received sentence, by which he was required to evacuate all the places he had oc. cupied beyond the ancient limits of his kingdom. This sentence he received with indignation and resentment, which were too unguardedly expref- fed, and which rendered him from thenceforward an object of continual attention and of jealousy to the Romans."
"A-fecond' commilTion was granted to'Tee the fen- tence'of the firif put in execution'; and as soon as it became publicly known, that the Romans were willing to receive complaints against Philip, and were disposed to protect every person who incurred his displeasure, ambassadors from the princes of Asia, and persons of every condition, from all the cities of Greece, and from all the diitrits in the neighbourhood of Macedonia, retorted to Rome with complaints against the king, rome of a pri- vate, and others of a public nature. The city was -crowded with itrarigers, and the Senate was oc- cupied, from morning to night, in hearing the presentations that were made by their allies on the subje of the usurpations and oppreflions they had flufered."
"Philip, to divert the form, had sent his younger Ton, -Demerrius, to answer the several charges which were expected to be brought against him; and, in the end, obtained a resolution of the Se- nate to accommodate matters on an amicable foot-  This resolution was grounded on pretence of"
"the"
"the favour which the Romans bore to Demetrius, A  wliohad long resided as an holtage in their city.  The king will please to know, they said,  that  he has done one thing extremely agreeable to  the Romans, in trusting his cause to an   vocate so well established in their eiteem and  regard  . This language of the Roman Senate refpeting Demetrius,' together with dangerous suggestions from some of his own confidents, probably inspired the young man with thoughts, or rendered him fufpeAed of designs, injurious to the rights of Per- feus, his elder brother. This prince took the alarm, and never ceased to excite the suspicions al- ready formed in the breait of the father, until he prevailed in securing his own succession by the death of his younger brother  ."
"Philip, having ordered the execution of one son to gratify thejealoufy of the other, lived about three years after this aftion, suffering part of the punish- ment that was due to him on that: account, in the most gloomy:apprehenfions of danger from his fur- viving son, and died in great solicitude for the fate of his kingdom. Perseus, nevertheless, in ascending the throne of Macedonia, 'gave hopes of a better and happier reign than that of his predecessor. He was imme- diately acknowledged by the Romans; and, during a few years after his acceflion, appeared to have no cause of disquietude from this people.  Although he had adopted.the measures of his father, and en- deavoured, by attention to his revenue, his army, and magazines; and by forming alliances with some of the warlike Thracian hordes in his neigh- bourhood, to put his kingdom in a posture of  fence, and in condition to assert its independence;"
"  Polyb. Excerpt. Legat.  46.   xxxix. 46-47.     xl.  24."
"yet"
"'s o xyet he appears to have excited less jealousy in the"
"L minds of his neighbours. The progress which he"
"made seems to have escaped the attention of the Romans; until, at last awakened by the report of a secret corretpondence which :he carried on with the republic of Carthage, they thought proper to fend a deputation into Macedonia, in order to ob- serve his motions."
"By the deputies employed in this service, the Rb. mans obtained intelligence, that Perseus had made advances to the Achmans as well as to the Carthagi- nians, and to other flates and was likely to form a powerful party among the Greeks."
"From this time forward the leaders of the Roman councils seemed to have taken a :resolution to move this subjet of jealousy,- and to.fupprefs the Macedonian monarchy. They renewed their at- tention to the slate of parties in Greece, and en- deavoured to reconcile all the differences that might incline any of those republics to oppose them in the execution of their design. They encouraged the king of Pergamus, who afterwards appears to have repented of the part which he took in that matter, to state his complaints. They brought him to Rome in person, and cited him before the Senate to give a complete detail of the circumfian- ces that were alarming in the policy of Perseus. Eumenes, having been thus brought forward as a formal accuser, and being to return through Greece, in order to offer his devotions at the tem- ple of Delphi, was assaulted and wounded by a party who meant to assassinate him; and this  sign, with some other aas of violence, being im- puted to Perseus, served as a pretence for the war which followed."
"The Roman Senate had already granted two fe- parate commissions, the one of a deputation to visit Macedonia, and to observe the motions of Perseus; the other of an embassy into Egypt, to confirm"
"their"
"their alliance with Ptolomy. On hearing of the at- A  tempt that had been made to affaflinate Eumenes, vn . they dire one of the Praetors, Caius Sicinius, ' with a proper force to pass into Epirus; and, in or- der to secure their access into that country, to take po0feflion of Apollonia, and other towns on the coast. But a misunderstanding then subsisting tween the Consuls, and other principal men of the Senate, caused some obftruation in the farther im- mediate prosecution of the war. Perseus however, alarmed by the arrival of a Roman force in his neighbourhood, sent an em- baffy to Rome with expostulations on the subjet, and with offers, by every reasonable concession that the Senate or the People could require, to avert the itorm which threatened him. But the Romans, as- fe resentment of the injuries they pretended to have received, ordered his ambassadors, without  lay, to depart from Italy; and give intimation, that, if for the future he should have any thing to offer, he might have recourse to the commander of the Roman army in Epirus. The interview, which Perseus soon after had with the Roman commiflioners, terminated with the strongest signs of hofiility on both fides  . The king, however, having taken minutes of what passed at their conference, sent copies to all the neighbouring flates, in order to exculpate himself from any guilt in the approaching war; and as the event afterwards showed how much it was the inte- reft of every state to support him, he being the only power that could give them any protection against the Romans; so numbers, already moved by this apprehension, were inclined to favour his cause. The Rhodians, then a formidable naval power, though refrained by fear from an open breach with the Romans, yet gave sufficient evidence of this difpofi-"
"    Ixii.  a5.  I. Q "
"B o  Eumenes likewise, though a principal inflru-"
"ment in fomenting the present quarrel, soon came averse to its consequences. The Beotians and Epirots, as well as the Illyrians, openly declared for the king of Macedonia  ."
"These circumfrances were fiated at Rome as  ditional grounds of complaint againit the king; and his endeavours to vindicate the part he had aded, were confidered as attempts to form a hostile federacy against the republic."
"Additional fleets and armies were accordingly as- fembled, and direted towards Epirus; and a  claration of war was issued in the form of an aft of the Roman people."
"The Romans had now, during about twenty-five years, borne a principal part among the nations that surrounded the Mediterranean sea. The as- cendant they had gained in all their wars or trea- ties, had made them common objects of fear or spect to all the contiguous powers of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The Macedonians, however, as the latest conquerors of the world, still retained a very high reputation for military skill and valour. The events of the late war rather furprized mankind, than convinced them of any deciaed superiority on the part of the Roman arms. The novelty of a new enemy, the mistakes or misconduct of the late king, might have accounted for his ill success. The kingdom had now been above twenty years exempted from any signal calamity, had re-eflab- lifhed its armies, and filled its magazines and its coffers. The military efiablifhment amounted to forty thousand men; the greater part formed and disciplined upon the plan of the phalanx, and sup- ported with numerous troops of irregulars from the warlike cantons of Thrace. The king himself) in the vigour of manhood, sensible that the storm could"
"  Polyb. Excerptx Legationes,  64-67."
"not"
"not be diverted, affeaed rather to desire than to A  decline the contest; and, under all there circum-  fiances, nations seemingly least interested in the' consequences were intent on the scene that was about to be opened before them. Eumenes, supposed to be incited by inveterate animosity to Perseus, and by recent provocations, prepared to fulfil his profeflions in behalf of the Romans. Ariarathes, the king of Cappadocia, equally clined by policy to wish for a counterpoise to the Macedonian power, but having recently formed an alliance by marriage with the family of Perseus,  termined to be neutral in the war. Ptolomy Philomater, who then filled the throne of Egypt, was a minor. Antiochus Epiphanes, who had lately succeeded his brother Seleucus, in the kingdom of Syria, having been some time an hofiage at Rome, asseted in his own court the manners of a Roman demagogue; but was chiefly intent on his pretensions to Celefyria, which he hoped to make good under favour of the ap- proaching conjuncure formed by the minority of Plolomy, and by the avocation of the Roman forces in Greece. The Carthaginians, and the king of Numidia, while they severally preferred their complaints against each other before the Roman Senate, vied likewise in their professions of zeal for the Roman republic, and in their offers of supply of men, horses, provisions, or (hips. Gentius, the king of Illyricum, had incurred the jealousy of the Romans; but remained undeter- mined what part he should take. Cotys, a Thracian king, declared openly for Perseus. The people of Greece, in their several republics were divided among themselves. The popular parties in general, being desirous to ex- change the government of their own ariftocracies
Qa2 for oo cfor that of a monarchy, favoured the king of Ma. !. - cedonia. The leading men were either inclined
to the Romans, or wilhed to balance the rival powers, so as to have, in the protecion of the one, some security against the usurpations of the other  .
The Romans had committed an error by fending a small force into Epirus, which the king of Mace- donia might have cut off before it could be properly supported from Italy ; but their commifioners then in that country, had the address to amuse the king with a negociation, and to divert him, during the sirss year of the war, from any attempt on Apollo- nia, or on any other station then in possession of the Roman troops.
In the following summer, about seven years after the accession of Perseus to the throne of Macedo- nia,' the war in that kingdom being committed to the Consul Licinius, this general followed the ar- my which had been transported to the coast of Epirus; and while the Roman fleet, with their al- lies, assembled in the firaits of Euboea, the armies on both fides began their operations. The Mace- donians encamped at Sycurium on the declivity of mount Offa. The Roman Consul penetrated into Thessaly; and, having pafied the river Peneus, took post at Scea, twelve miles from the camp of the enemy. Here he wasjoined by Attalus, brother to the king of Pergamus, with four thousand men, and by smaller bodies collected from different tfates of Greece.
Perseus endeavoured to lay waste the kingdom of Phera, from which the Romans drew the greatest part of their fubfillence; and an action ensued, in which the whole cavalry and light infantry of both armies being engaged, the Romans were  feated; and the Consul, no longer able to sup-
    xlii.  29-30.
port port his foraging parties on that of the Peneus A  against a superior enemy, decamped in the night,  and repassed the river.
Although this victory had a tendency to raise the hopes of the king, 'it was by him wifely fidered as a fit opportunity to renew the overtures of peace; and, in order to bring on a negociation, it was resolved, that the conditions which, under the misfortune of repeated defeats, had been of- sered by his father, should be made the preli- minaries of the present treaty.
It appeared to the king, and to those with whom he consulted, that, in the sequel of a victory, this would appear an at of moderation, not of fear that all neutral powers, who dreaded the confe- quences of a decided superiority on either  would favour the person who should propose to have peace re-established on moderate terms; and that the Romans, being induced to terminate the war under the effects of a defeat, would from thenceforward refpet the Macedonian monarchy, and be cautious how they difiurbed its tranquil- lity.
But if in this manner the opportunity was per- ceived, and wifely laid hold of by the councils of Perseus, it by no means efcaped.the Roman coun- cil of war, which was assembled to receive the proposals of the: king.
The Romans, whether from national spirit or policy, at all timesdeclinedenteringon negociations or treaties in consequence of defeats. They spurn- the advances of a victorious enemy, while they received those of the vancuifhed with condefcen- sion and mildness. They accordingly, in the present cafe, treated the concessions of Perseus with dain, haughtily answering, that he must submit at discretion (A).   In adverfis vultum fecunda fortuna gerere, rnodcrir an;mos in fctundis.   xlii.  6z.
This o This reply was received at the court of Perseus
with extreme furprize. But it produced still far- ther concessions; and infiead of resentment from the king, a repetition of his mefIage with an offer to augment the tribute which had been paid by his father (i).
The remainder of the summer having passed in the operations of foraging parties, without any considerable acion, the Romans retired for the winter into Beotia. On this coaR the fleet, having met with no enemy at sea, had made repeated descents to distress the inhabitants who had  clared for the king. The consul took poffeflion of his quarters, without any refiltance, in the terior parts of the country, and in this, with the progress that was made by the army employed on the of Illyricum in detaching that nation from Perseus, confifed the service of the first campaign.
Licinius, at the expiration of the usual term, was relieved by his successor in office, A. Hoftilius Marcius. This commander, being defeated and baffled in some attempts he made to penetrate into the kingdom of Macedonia, appears to have made. a campaign still less fortunate than that of his decefilor and the Senate, at the end of the summer, having ordered him home to preside at the annual elections, sent a deputation to visit the army, and to enquire into the cause of their miscarriages, and the ilovnefs of their progrels.
The Romans, although they had experienced disappointments in the beginning of other wars, particularly in their first encounters with Pyrrhus and with Hannibal; and had reason to expec a similar effet in the opening of the present war, appear to have been greatly mortified and fur- prized at this unpromising afpe& of their enterprize. They were engaged with an enemy renowned for
(i) Polyb. ExCerpt. Legat.  69.
difcipllne,
discipline, who had made war a trade, and the A  use of arms a profeflion; while they themselves,  it appears, for a considerable period after the sent war, even during the most rapid progress of their arms, had no military establishment besides that of their civil and political conflitution, no fol- diers besides their citizens, and no officers but the ordinary magifirates of the commonwealth."
"If this establishment had its advantages  , it may have appeared, on particular occasions, like- wife to have had its defeCts. The citizen may have been too much a mafler in his civil capacity to sub- jeat himself fully to the bondage of a soldier; and too absolute in his capacity of military officer to bear with the controul of political regulations. As the obligation to serve in the legions was general and without exception, many a citizen, at least in the cafe of any distant or unpromising service, would endeavour to shun his duty. And the officer would not always dare to enforce disagreeable duty on those by whom he himself was elected, or on whom he in part depended for farther advancement."
"At the beginning of this war, the legions were augmented from five thousand two hundred foot and two hundred horse, to fix thousand foot and three hundred horse (1); and probably, to raise the authority of the Consul more effectually into that of a commander in chief, he was commissioned to name the Tribunes, as well as the Centurions of the army, that were to serve under his orders: but, upon a complaint that this extension of the Consul powers did not, by enforcing the difci- pline of the army, serve the purpose for which it was made, the people resumed their right of elec- in the appointment even of inferior officers. The deputies now sent into Macedonia by the Se- nate reported, that the legions employed in that"
"  Vid.  i.  3. (1)   xliii.  12."
"country"
"B country were extremely incomplete, numbers"
"I both of the lower officers and private men being, '  by the dangerous indulgence of their leaders, sus-"
"'sered to absent themselves from their colours (mi). This abuse we may apprehend to have been fre- quent in a service that was to be performed by citizens who had the choice of their own manders. And from speculative ideas on the sub- jec, if we were not bound to be governed by ex- perience as the preferable tutor, we should be apt to reject, as an improper mode of forming armies, that eftablilhment by which the Romans conquered the world."
"It is probable, that not only the defet of sub- ordination in the beginning of every war, but that of skill, likewise, in the use of their peculiar wea- pons, made, in the Roman armies, a great difpa- rity between raw and veteran troops."
"The use of the buckler and sword required great fill, agility, and muscular strength; all of them the effect of exercise and of continued practice."
"The experience of the soldier who survived ma- ny adtions tended to confirm his courage, because his escape was in a great measure the effeEt of his fk1l1, or of his strength; and upon a return of si- milar dangers, gave him confidence in himself."
"In battles the firong and the ikilful escaped, the weak and the awkward were likely to perish; and every action not only exercised the arms of those that survived, but made a feledion of the vigour- ous and skilful to be reserved for future occasions."
"Hence probably, in the Roman armies, much more than in those of modem Europe, the praatifed soldier had a great superiority over the novice; and citizens, when brought into the field by ro- tation, had much to learn in the course of every campaign."
"pr,)   zl   ."
"In"
"In the present contest, the checks of the first andc A  the second year of the war, though extremely mor- ._. tifying to the Romans, were received without any signs of irresolution, or change of their purpose. In the third year after hostilities commenced, the command of the army in Macedonia devolved on QO Marcius Philippus, who, being chosen one of the Consuls, drew his province as uiual by lot. This officer had been employed in one of the late deputations that were sent into Greece; had (hown his ability in the course of negociations which ceded the war; and now, by his condut as a ge- neral, broke through the line with which the king had endeavoured to secure the passes of the moun- tains, and to cover the frontier of his kingdom. But, when he had penetrated into Macedonia, he found himlelf at the end of the season, and for want of proper supplies of provisions on that of the mountains, unable to pursue the advantage he had gained. Here, therefore, he staid only to deliver his army to Emilius Paullus, who had been named to succeed him. This was the son of that Paullus, who, being one of the Consuls who manded the Roman army at Cannae, threw away his life rather than survive that defeat. The Ton was now turned of sixty (in) ; and by the length of his service, and the variety of his experience in Li- guria and Spain, was well acquainted with the chan- ces of war. Emilius Paullus, upon his election, in order that he might not be liable to answer for the faults of his predecessors, moved, that deputies should be sent into Macedonia to review the army, and to make a report of its itate before he entered upon the command. His speech to the People, when about to depart for his province, carries a striking allusion to the petulant freedom with which, it"
"(,,) Plutarch. in Vit. Emil.  157."
"'seems,"
"B o i seems, unsuccessful commanders were censured, or"
"traduced in the popular conversations at Rome, and carries a defiance with which he proposed to silence the blame that might afterwards be cast on himself Let such as think themselves qualified to advice  the general, he said,  now accompany me into Macedonia. They shall have a passage on board my ship; and, in the field, be welcome to a  place in my tent and at my table, but if they now decline this offer, let them not afterwards pretend to judge of what they neither fee nor  underfiand. Nor let them set up their own  opinion against that of a fellow-citizen, who is erving the public to the utmost of his ability, and at the hazard of his life and of his ho- ' nours.
Emilius, upon his arrival in Macedonia, found the king entrenched on the banks of the Enipeus, with his right and left covered by mountains, on which all the passes were secured. After some  lay, during which he was employed in observing the enemy dirpofition, or in improving the difci- pline of his own army, he sent a detachment to possess the Macedonians of one of the flations which they occupied on the heights, with orders to the officer who commanded in this service, that, if he succeeded in it, he should fall down on the plain in the rear of the enemy; he himself, in the mean time, made a feint to attack them in front.
The pots on the heights being forced, Perseus relinquished his preient disposition, and fell back towards Pydna on the banks of the Aliacmon. Here it became necessary for him either to hazard a battle, or, on account of the nature of the country behind him, to separate his forces.
He preferred the firii, and made choice of a plain that was fit to receive the phalanx, and was fiirted
withi
with hills, on which his light troops could aa withc A  advantage. Here too the Roman consul continued to press upon him, and was inclined to seize the first op- portunity of deciding the war. Both armies, as by appointment, presented themselves on the plain in order of battle, and Emilius Paullus seemed eager to engage; but, as he himfelf.ufed to confess, having never beheld an appearance so formidable as when the Macedonians levelled their spears, he thought proper to halt (i). Though much difcon- certed, he endeavoured to preserve his counte- nance, would not recede from his ground; and that he might encamp his army where they now flood, ordered the firit line to remain under arms, and ready to attack the enemy, while those who were behind them began to intrench; having in this manner cast up a breast-work of considerable firength, he retired behind it, and under that cover completed the fortifications of a camp in the usual form.
In this position he waited for an opportunity to draw on an engagement, when the enemy should be less prepared to receive him, or not have time to avail themselves so much of that formidable order which conflituted the itrength of the phalanx. This occasion soon afterwards seemed to be of- sered by a fkirmilh which happened in the fields between the two armies. A horse, having broke loose from the camp of the Romans, fled towards that of the Macedonians, was followed by the fol- diers from whom he escaped, and met by their enemy from the opposite camp. These parties en- gaged, and each being joined by numbers from their refpedive armies, brought on at last a general ation. The ground was favourable to the pha- lanx; and the Macedonians, though hastily formed,
  Polyb. Fragment.    243.
fill o fill pofTefed against the Romans the advantage of
' their weapons, and of their formidable order.
They filled up the plain in front, and could not be flanked.' They had only to maintain their ground, and had no occasion to discompose their ranks, in time of the aEtion, by any change of position. They accordingly withstood with ease the firfi shock of the Roman legions; but were broken and disjointed in the sequel by the Seemingly irregular attacks which were made at intervals by the mani- pules, or the separate divisions of the Roman foot. The parts of the phalanx that were attacked, whether they were prelled in, or came forward to press on their enemy, could not keep in an exat line with the parts that were not attacked. Open- ings were made, at whi the Roman soldier, with his buckler and short sword, could easily enter. Emilius, observing this advantage, direced his at- tack on those places at which the front of the phalanx was broken; and the legionary soldier, having got within the point of his antagonist spear, pierced to the heart of the column, and in this position made a havock which foor threw the vhc-le into disorder and general route .
Twenty thousand of the Macedonians were killed in the field, five thotU-and were made prisoners in their flight; and fix thousand that shut themselves up in the iown of Pydna were obliged to surrender at discretion .
After this detear, the king of Macedonia, with a few attendants, fled to Pella, where, having taken up his ildren and the remains of his treasure, amounting to ten thousand talents, or about two millions of pounds iterling(q), he continued his flight to Amphipo'is, and from thence to Samothra- cia, where he took reflge in the famous fandcuary of that illand.
  Pl,: :rch .- '.i:. Er 3;. 173, ! .: Li7. i. ll   42. .!) so:\a. .. ~ xx:i . .-- .,. i Emil is
Emilius pushed on to Amphipolis, receiving thec A  submission of all the towns and diftriets as he pass- vJ  The Praetor, Oavius, then commanding the Roman fleet, beset the island of Samothracia with his ships; and, without violating the fanetu- ary, took measures that effetually prevented the king escape. This unfortunate prince, with some of his children, delivered themselves up to the Praetor, and were conduEted to the camp of Emilius. The king threw himself on the ground, and would have embraced the tor knees, when the Roman ge- neral, with a condescension that is extolled by an- cient historians, gave him his hand, and raised him from the ground, but reproached him as the ag- grelTor in the late contest with the Romans; and with a leflbn of morality, which tore up the wounds of the unfortunate monarch, bid the young men who were present look on this obje& as an exam- ple of the instability of fortune, and of the vicifli- tude of human affairs.
While the war in Macedonia was coming to this issue, that in Illyricum had a like termination, and ended about the fame time in the captivity of the king.
News of both were received at Rome about the fame time, and filled the temples, as usual, with multitudes who crowded to perform the public rites of thanksgiving that were ordered by the Senate. Soon after which, embalfies arrived from all the kings and states of the then known world, with  dreifes of congratulation on so great an event. The Senate proceeded to form a plan for the settlement of Macedonia.
It was resolved to extinguish the monarchy, to divide its territory into four diitridts, and in each to eflablifh a republican government, adminiitered by councils and magifirates chosen by the People. This, among the Greeks, could bear the interpre-
tation
Bo tation of beflowing absolute liberty. Ten missioners were named to carry this plan into exe- ~--'cution in Macedonia, and five were appointed fcr"
"a similar purpose in Illyricum. Emilius was con. tinued in his command, and the army ordered to remain in Macedonia until the settlement of the province should be completed."
"The Commissioners, agreeably to their infiruc- tions, fixed the limits of the several diftrids, and, probably to perpetuate the reparation of them, or to prevent any dangerous communication between their inhabitants, prohibited them to intermarry, or to hold any commerce in the property of land, from one division to another."
"To some other refiri6tions, which had more a tendency to weaken or to dismember this once powerful monarchy, than to confer freedom on the people, they joined an at of favour, in confider- ably diminishing their former burdens, reducing their tribute to one half of what they had usually paid to their own kings; and, to facilitate or to secure the reception of the republican form which was devised for them, they ordered all the ancient nobles, and all the retainers of the late court, as being irreconcileable with the equality of citizens under a republic, to depart from the kingdom, and to chufe places of residence for themselves in Italy."
"A like plan was followed with refpea to Illyri- cum, which was divided into three diftrints; and the kings both of Macedonia and of this country, with many other captives, were conducted to Rome to adorn the triumph of their conquerors."
"Perseus is said to have lived as a prisoner at Alba, about four years after he had been exhibited in this procession. Alexander, one of his sons, had an education calculated merely to procure him subsistence, and was afterwards, as a scribe or a"
"clerk,"
"clerk, employed in some of the public offices at A  Rome. VJ While the event of the Macedonian war was yet undecided, and no considerable advantage, either of conduct or fortune, appeared on the of the Romans, they still preserved the usual arrogance of their manner, and interposed with the fame im- perious ascendant in the affairs of Greece, Asia, and Africa, that they could have done in confe- quence of the most decisive victory. It was at this time that, by the celebrated message of Popilius Lenas, they put a flop to the conquefis of Antio- chus Epiphanes in Egypt. This prince, trusting to the full employment with which the Roman forces were engaged, had ventured to invade this kingdom, and was in poffeflion of every part of it, except the city of Alexandria. He was occu- pied in the siege of this place when Popilius ar- rived and delivered him an order of the Senate to deists. The king made answer, That he would confider of it.  Determine before you pass this  line, said the Roman, tracing a circle with the rod which he held in his hand. This people, how- ever, had occasion, during the dependance of the Macedonian war, to observe that few of their al- lies were willing to support them in the extremes to which they seemed to be inclined. The Epirots had acually declared for the king of Macedonia. The Rhodians had offered their mediation to nego- tiate a peace, and threatened hostility againit ei- ther of the parties who should refute to accept of it. Even Eumenes was fufpeded of having entered into a secret concert with Perseus, although the fall of that prince prevented any open effects of their treaty.
The Romans, nevertheless, disguised their fentment of there several provocations, until their principal enemy, the king of Macedonia, was sub- dued; after they had accomplilhed this end, they
proceeded o  proceeded against every other party, with a feve. _it i1 rity which was then supposed to be permitted in
the law of nations, and no more than proportioned to their supposed offence. They gave orders to Emilius, in passing through Epirus, to lay that country under military execution. Seventy towns were accordingly destroyed, and an hundred and fifty thousand of the people fold for slaves.
The Senate refused to admit the ambafTadors of Rhodes, who came to congratulate the Roman people on their vicory at Pydna. They firipped those islanders of the provinces which had been granted to them on the continent by the late treaty with Antiochus, and ordered them to discontinue some duties levied from ships in paling through their found, which made a considerable part of their revenue.
While Eumenes was coming in person to pay his court to the Senate, they resolved to forbid the concourse of kings to Rome. Their meaning, though exprefled in general terms, was evidently levelled at this prince; and they ordered, that when he should arrive at Brunduium, their refolu- should be intimated to him, to prevent his nearer approach.
They in reality, from this time forward, though in the style of allies, treated the Grecian republics as fubjeas.
Such was the rank which the Romans assumed among nations; while their flatefmen Itill retained much of their primeval ruflicity, and did not fider the diliinAions of fortune and equipage as the appurtenances of power or of high command. Cato, though a citizen of the highest rank, and vested fuccefiively with the dignities of Consul and of Censor, used to partake in the labour of his own slaves, and to feed with them from the fame dish at their meals  . When he commanded the armies
  Plutarch in Vir, C3:oa ,  3oc. *i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,
of the republic, the daily allowance of his household A  was no more than three medimni, or about. as vl. many bushels of wheat for his family, and half a medimnus, or half a bushel of barley for his horses. In Surveying his province he usually travelled on foot, attended by a fingie slave who carried his baggage  . These particulars are mentioned perhaps as pe- culiar to Cato; but such singularities in the man- ners of a peroln placed so high among the people, carry orne general intimation of the fashion of the times. A spirit of equality yet reigned among the members of the commonwealth, which rejected the diftintions of fortune, and checked the admi- ration of private wealth. In all military donations the Centurion had no more than double the allow- ance of a private soldier, and no military rank was indelible. The Consul and commander in chief of one year-ferved not only in the ranks, but even as a Tribune or inferior officer in the next; and the fame person who had displayed the genius and ability of the general, still valued him- self on the courage and address of a legionary soldier. No one was raised above the glory to be reaped from the exertion of mere perlonal courage and bodily strength. Persons of the highest condition sent or accepted a defiance to fight in single bat, in pretence of the armies to which they longed. Marcus Servilius, a person of consular rank, in order to enhance the authority with which he spoke when he pleaded for the triumph of Paulus Emilius, informed the People that he himself, full three and twenty times, had fought singly with so many champions of the enemy, and that in each of there encounters he had slain and stripped his
  Plat, in  Catonis,  335 &338.  I. antagonist. o antagoniit. A combat of the fame kind was after-
I- wards fought by the younger Scipio, when serving  in Spain."
"The sumptuary laws of this age were suited to the idea of citizens who were determined to tribute their utmost to the grandeur of the State; but to forego the means of luxury or personal dif. tintion. Roman ladies were restrained, except in religious proceflions, from the use of carriages any where within the city, or at the distance of less than a mile from its walls; and yet the space over which they were to preserve their communications extended to a circuit of fourteen miles, and began to be so much crowded with buildings or cottages, that, even before the reduction of Macedonia, it was become necefiary to restrain private persons from encroaching on the itreets, squares, and other spaces reserved for public conveniency. In a place of this magnitude, and so flocked with inhabitants, the female sex was also forbid the use of variegated or party-coloured clothes, or of more than half an ounce of gold in the ornament of their persons. This law being repealed, contrary to the senti- ments of Cato, this citizen, when he came, in the capacity of Censor, to take account of the equi- pages, clothes, and jewels of the women, taxed each of them tenfold for whatever was found in her wardrobe exceeding the value of one thousand five hundred denarii, or about fifty pounds fter- ling  ."
"The attention of the legislature was carried into the detail of entertainments or feasts. In one a& the number of the guests, and in a subsequent one the expence of their meals, were limited. By the Lex Tribonia, enaced about twenty years after the reduction of Macedonia, a citizen was allowed on certain high festivals, to expend three hundred"
"    xxxiv.  i-6."
"ases,"
"afles, or about twenty (hillings sterling; on other A  festivals of less note, one hundred asses, or about fix shillings and eight pence; but during the mainder of the year, no more than ten asses, or about eight pence; and was not allowed to serve up more than one fowl, and this with a proviso that it (hould not be crammed or fatted  ."
"Superitition made a principal article in the cha- ra&er of the people. It subjected them continu- ally to be occupied or alarmed with prodigies and ominous appearances, of which they endeavoured to avert the effects by rites and expiations, as flrange and irrational as the presages on which they had grounded their fears. Great part of their time was accordingly taken up with processions and public (hews, and much of their fubflance, even to the whole annual produce of their herds  , was occasionally expended in sacrifices, or in the performance of public vows. The first officers of State, in their functions of the priesthood, per- formed the part of the cook and the butcher; and, while the Senate was deliberating on queflions of great moment, examined the entrails of a victim, in order to know what the gods had determined.  You must defifi, said the Consul Cornelius, en- tering the Senate with a countenance pale and marked with afionifhment;  1 myself have visited  the boiler, and the head of the liver is  fumed  ."
"According to the opinions entertained in those times, sorcery was a principal expedient employed by those who had secret designs on the life of their neighbour. It was supposed to make a part in the statutory crime of poisoning; and the fame ima- gination which admitted the charge of sorcery as   Plin.    50.   The Ver Sacrum was a general sacrifice of all the young of their herds for a whole year.     xli.  15."
"R 2 credible,"
"B o credible, was, in particular instances, when any"
"_, person was accused, easily convinced of his guilt;"
"insomuch that some thousands were at times vicled together of this imaginary crime  ."
"The manners of the people of Italy were at times subject to firange disorders, or the magifirate gave credit to wild and improbable reports. The itory of the Bachanals, dated in the year of Rome five hundred and fixty-fix, or about twenty years before the conquest of Macedonia, may be confi- dered as an infiance of one or the other  . A so- ciety, under the name of Bachanals, had been rfituted, on the suggestion of a Greek pretender to divination. The desire of being admitted into this society prevailed throughout Italy, and the fed came extremely numerous. As they commonly met in the night, they were said at certain hours to extinguish their lights, and to indulge themselves in every practice of horror, rape, incels, and murder; crimes under which no feet or fraternity could pof- sibly subsist, but which, in being imputed to num- bers in this credulous age, gave occasion to a severe inquisition, and proved fatal to many persons at Rome, and throughout Italy."
"The extreme fuperflition, however, of those times, in some of its effects, vied with genuine ligion; and, by the regard it inspired, more efpe- cially for the obligation of oaths, became a prin- ciple of public order and of public duty, and in many iniiances superseded the use of penal or pulfory laws."
"When the citizen swore that he would obey the call of the magifirate to enlist in the legions; when the soldier swore that he would not desert his co- lours, disobey his commander, or fly from his ene- my ; when a citizen, at the call of the Censor, ported on oath the amount of his effeAts; the State,   Lv.  xLxix. . .41.   . & fcqucn. (.) Venificium."
"in"
"in all those instances, with perfeA confidence reliedc A  on the good faith of her fubjeds, and was not  V1. ceived."
"In the period to which these observations refer, that is, in the sixth century of the Roman State, the first dawning of literature began to appear. It has been mentioned that a custom prevailed among the primitive Romans, as among other rude nations, at their feasts to sing or rehearse heroic ballads which recorded their own deeds or those of their ancef- tors . This pracice had been some time continued, and the compositions themselves were loft. They were succeeded by pretended monu- ments of hiRfory equally fallacious, the orations which, having been pronounced at funerals, were, like titles of honour, preserved in the archives of eve- ry noble house, but which were rather calculated to flatter the vanity of families, than to record the truth  ."
"The Romans owed the earliest compilations of their history to Greeks; and in their own first at- tempts to relate their itory employed the language of that people  . Naevius and Ennius, who were the first that wrote in the Latin tongue, composed their relations in verse. Livius Andronicus, and afterwards Plautus and Terence, translated the Greek fable, and exhibited in the fireets of Rome, not the Roman, but Grecian manners. The two last are said to have been persons of mean conditi- on; the one to have fubfilted by turning a baker mill, the other to have been a captive and a slave. Both of them had probably possessed the Greek tongue as a vulgar dialet, which was yet spoken in many parts of Italy, and from this circumstance, became acquainted with the elegant compositions of   Cic. Claris Oratoribus,  19.     394.   Dion. Ial.  i.  5."
"Philemon"
"B O Philemon and Menander  . Their comedies were __, a&sed in the fireets, without any feats or benches"
"for the reception of an audience. But a nation so little studious of ordinary conveniencies, and con. tented to borrow their literary models from neigh- bours, to whom, being mere imitators, they conti- nued for ages inferior, were, however, in their po- litical and military chara&er, superior to all other a.  5Es.nations whatever; and, at this date, had extended"
"a dominion, which originally consisted of a poor village on the Tiber, to more empire and territory than is now enjoyed by any kingdom or state of Europe.   The people of Cumz, abont this time, applied for leave to have their public ach, for the time, expressed in Latin."
"T THE I Y"
"OF THE pROGRESS AND TERMINATION"
"O THE ROMAN REPUBLIC."
"BOOK "
"CHAP. I. State, Manners, and Policy of the Titnes.-Repeated"
"Complaints from Carthage.-Hoftile Disposition of the Romans.-Refolution to remove Carthage from the CoaJt.-Meafires taken for this Piurpofe.-Car- thage befieged.--'aken and deflroyed.-Revolt of the Macedonians. eir Kingdom reduced to the Form of a Roman Province.-Fate of the Achc.an League.-Operations in Spainz.-Condiict of Viria- thus.-State of TNumantia.-Blockade of Nlunantia. -Its deJfrution.--Revolt of the Slaves in Sicily.- Legal Eflablifjiments and Manners of the City. HE redution of Macedonia was in manyc A "
"refpets a remarkable era in the history of Rome. Before this date Roman citizens had been ' treated as fubjets, and permitted themselves to be taxed. They were required at every census to"
"make"
"B o make a return of their effects upon oath, and, "
"fides other stated or occasional contributions to the public, paid a certain rate on the whole value of their property. But upon this event they assumed more entirely thi character of Sovereigns; and, having a treafurV replenished with the spoils of that kingdom, exempted tlemfelves from their for- rer burdens."
"The accefion of wealth, said to have put them in this condition, is variously reported. Livy quotes Vaicrius Antias as stating it at miillies ducenties, or about a million sterling ; Velleius Paterculus flates it at douole this fum, and Pliny at somewhat more (a). But the highest or these computations scarcely appears adequate to the effec supposed. It is more likely that the ordinary income of the trea- fury, confilling of the fums so frequently deposited at the triumphs of victorious leaders, the tributes received from Carthage and Syria- the rents of Campania, the tithes of Sicily and Sardinia, with the addition of the revenue recently conflituted in Macedonia, put the Romans at last in condition to exempt themselves from taxation; an effec which ho perishing capital placed at once in their coffers could be supposed to produce. The Roman trea- fiury, when examined about ten years after this date, was found to contain, in bars of gold and silver, and in coin, not much more than half a million sterling  : a frum which, without a per and regular supply, must have been soon ex- haufied."
"From the conclusion of the war with Perseus, the Romans, for twenty years, do not seem to have been engaged with any considerable enemy; and their numerous colonies; now dilperfed over Italy; from Aquileia to Rhegium, probably made great   Veilcin-,  i.  9. Plin.  xxxiii.  3. () 'lin. lb. xxxii.  3. In eoldl i6,StoF . in silver 22,070E. and in coin 6zo,854,coo   Arbuthnotof Ancient Coins."
"advances,"
"advances, during this period, in agriculture, com A  merce, and the other arts of peace. Among their , public works are mentioned, not only temples and fortifications, particulars in which men attain to magnificence even in rude ages, but likewise aque- duets, market-places, pavements, high-ways, and other conveniencies, the preludes or attendants of wealth and commerce. Cato, in pleading againfi the repeated elecion of the fame person into the office of Consul, ex- claimed againit the luxury of the times, and al- leged, that so many citizens could not support their extravagance by any other means than that of draining the provinces by virtue of their repeated appointments to command.  Observe, he said, their villas how curiously built, how richly fur- nifhed with ivory and precious wood. Their  very floors are coloured or slained in the Punic  fashion  .
The Romans had formerly made laws to fix the Le ,An- age at which citizens might be chosen into the ali;. ferent offices of State  . And on the occasion on which Cato made this fpecch, they excluded the fame person from being repeatedly chosen. They likewile made those additions to former sumptuary laws which have been already mentioned. The Census, or enrolment of the People, began to be made with more care than formerly: even the  tin allies, though migrating to Rome, were ex- cluded from the rolls   and the people generally muttered from three to four hundred thousand men. While the Romans had no war to maintain with the more regular and formidable rivals of their   Vid. Pompeium Feflum.   It appears that, by this law, being Quefiors at thirty-one, they might rife to the conlulate at forty-three.   Plutarch, in the life of Flamininur, mentions a law by which the Cenlbrs were obliged to enrol every freeman that offered. The Latins complained, that their towns were depopulated by emigrations to Rome.   xli.  8.
power, OK power, they till employed their legions on the
, frontier of their.provinces in Spain, Dalmatia, Li.
guria, and on the descents of the Alps. They opened, for the first time, an intercourse with the Transalpine nations, in a treaty of alliance with the republic of Marseilles; in consequence of which, they proteced that mercantile settlement from the attacks of fierce tribes, who infested them from the maritime extremities of the Alps and Ap- penines. They were in general the umpires in the differences of nations, gave audience in all their complaints, interposed with their forces as well as authority, and dilpofed of provinces and kingdoms at their pleasure. They kept a vigilant eye on the condudt and policy of all the different powers with whom they were at any time likely to be embroil-  and generally conduced their tranfaCions with independent nations as they adjusted the firit set- tlement of their own acquisitions, by commiflion and deputations sent from the Senate to decide, with the least possible delay, on such matters as might arise in the place to which their deliberations referred.
The number of commifiioners employed in there services, for the most part, was ten. There took incfrmations, formed plans, and made their reports for the final decision of the Senate, and, by the frequency of these appointments, it appears that the members of the Senate, in rotation, had an opportunity of becoming acquainted with that world which they were destined to govern.
The Senate itself, though, from its numbers and the emulation of its members, likely to embarraft affairs by debate, delay, and the rath publication of all its designs, in reality possessed all the advan- tages of decision, secrecy, and dispatch, that could be obtained in the molt feled executive council. This numerous assembly of Roman statesmen ap- pear to have mainta;ned, during a long period, one
series,
series of consistent and uniform design; and kept A  their intentions so secret, that their resolutions, for ' the most part, were known only by the execution. ' The king of Pergamus made a journey to Rome, in order to excite the Romans to a- war with his rival, the king of Macedonia. He preferred his complaints in the Senate, and prevailed on this body to resolve on the war; but no part of the tranfa&ion was public, till after the king of Mace- donia was a prisoner at Rome  . Duringthe present respite from any.confiderable war, the Romans balanced the kingdoms of Per- gamus, Bithynia; and Cappadocia, againfi each other, in such a manner as to be able, at pleasure, to oppress any of those powers that should become refractory or formidable to their interest. They made the kingdom of Syria devolve on a minor, the son of Antiochus; and, under the tence of this minority, sent a commiflion to take charge of the kingdom. But their commiflioners were, with the connivance of the court, assaulted in a riot at Antioch; some of them were killed, and others forced to fly from the country. Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, who ought to have succeeded to his father in the monarchy of Syria, being, at the death of that prince, an hof- tage at Rome, had been supplanted by his young- er brother, the father of that minor prince who was now acknowledged by the Romans. Upon the insult that had been thus offered to the Roman commission at Antioch, Demetrius thought it a favourable opportunity to urge his claim, and to prevail on the Senate to restore him to the succession of his father crown: but these crafty usurpers, notwithstanding the offence they had received from those who were in poffeflion of the monarchy, preferred the advantages which
  Valer. Maxim,    
they o Kthey had over a minor king, to the precarious as- __ section or gratitude of an active spirited prince,
educated at Rome, and taught by their own ex. ample to know his interest; and they accordingly denied his requefi.
Demetrius, however, made his escape from Rome, and, by the death of the minor and his tu- tor, got unrivalled possession of the kingdom of Syria. To pay his court to the Romans, as one of the firit acs of his reign, he sent the murderer of their late commissioner, Otavius, in chains, to be punished at their discretion. But the Senate disdained to wreck their public wrongs on a pri- vate criminal; or, having cause of complaint againfi the nation itself, were not to be satisfied with the punishment of a tingle person. They suffered the prisoner, as beneath their attention, to depart.
As patrons of the kingdom of Egypt, they moted the division of that country between the two brothers, who were then joined in the fove- reignty, and rivals for the sole poffeflion of the throne  .
During the dependence of there tranfations, the Senate had repeated complaints from Africa, which ended in a war that proved fatal at last to the an- tient rivals of their power. In the conduct of this war, being now less dependent than formerly on the opinion of the world, they, contrary to their ufial pretensions to national generosity and libera- lity, sacrificed, without reserve, entire nations to the ambition, or to the meaneftjealoufy, of their own republic  .
The province of Emporie, a difiria lying on the coast, and the richest part of the Carthaginian territory, had been violently seized by Gala king of Numidia, and father of Maffinifla. It had been
 .Polyb. Excerpts Legationes.    No. ,42.
again
again restored by Syphax, when he supplanted thec A  family of Gala on the throne of that kingdom; but now again usurped by Mailinifa on recovering the crown by the power of the Romans, to whose fa- vour he trufied; and the Carthaginians, precluded by the late treaty from making war on any ally of the Romans, had recourse to complaints and presentations, which they made at Rome, both fore and after the redution of Macedonia. The Roman Senate had, for five and twenty years, eluded these complaints, and, during this time, was in the practice of fending commiflioners into Africa, under pretence of hearing the parties in this important dispute, but with inftruations or positions to favour Maflinifa, and to observe, with a jealous eye, the condition and the movements of their ancient rival (i). The Carthaginians, yet possessed of ample sources, and, if wealth or magnificence could flitute firength, fiill a powerful nation; being weary of repeated applications, to which they could obtain no satisfying answer, took their resolution to arm, and to assert by force their claim to the terri- tory in question. They were met in the field by the army of Maffiniifa, commanded by himself, though now about ninety years of age, and were defeated  . This unfortunate event disappointed their hopes, and exposed them to the resentment of the Romans, who confidered the attempt they had made to do themselves justice, as a contravention of the late treaty, and a departure from the articles of peace between the two nations. The expediency of a war with Carthage had been for some time a fubjedt of debate in the Ro- man Senate. Deputies had been sent into Africa,
(i) Polyb. Excerpta Legationes,  11S.   xl.  17.    Epitome,  ixviii. Appiaa Bell. Punic,  38.
to o to procure the information that was necessary to __ determine this question. Among these Cato, itruck with the greatness, wealth, and popu. lousne of that republic, and with the amazing ser- tility of its territory, when he made his report in the Senate, carried in his lap a parcel of figs which he had brought from thence.  These, he said,  are the produce of a land that is but three days  fail from Rome. Judge what Italy may haveto  fear from a country whole produce is so much  superior to its own. That country is now in  arms; the sword is drawn against Mafliniffa;  but when thrust in his  will penetrate to  you. Your boasted victories have not subdued the Carthaginians, but given them exoerience, ' taught them caution, and inflruded them how  to disguise, under the semblance of peace, a  war which you will find marshalled against you  in their docks and in their arsenals. This, and every other speech on this fubjeat, Cato concluded with his famous faying;  That Carthage should ' be destroyed (/). Scipio Nafica, another speaker in this debate, contended for peace. He represented the forces of Carthage as not sufficient to alarm the Romans; or, if really greater than there was any reason to suppose them, no more than were requisite to exercise the virtues of a people already, for want of proper exertion, begun to susser tome abatement in their vigilance, discipline, and va- lour.
In this diversity of opinions, it appeared Coon as- ter, that the Senate took a middle course, resolved not to defiroy, but to remove the inhabitants of Carthage to a new situation, at least ten miles from the sea  . (I) Delenda eft Carthago. (.:) Appian in Punicis. Plutarch in Vit. Catonis. Zonaras,  ix.  6. Orof.  i.    Vcllciu',  i.  iz. Pol  Excerptx Legationes, No. 4Tz The
The Carthaginians, after their late unfortunate A  adventure with Massinissa, were willing to preserve ' their effeats, and to purchase tranquillity by the lowet conceflions. But as the measure now posed by the Roman Senate, amounted to a  privation of all that property which is veiRed in houses or public edifices, and an entire fupprefflon of all those local means of fubfiflence which could not be easily transferred, it was not supposed that their consent could be easily obtained, and it was accordingly resolved to keep the design a fe- cret, until effectual means were prepared for its execution. The consuls, without any declaration of war, were inflruted to arm, and to pass with their forces into Sicily. As their arrival on that island, which was then in a slate of profound peace, evi- dently implied a design upon Africa, the people of Utica, that they might have the merit of an early declaration in favour of the Romans, sent a deputation to make them a tender of their port and town, as a harbour and place of arms for the accommodation of their forces. The Carthaginians were diflrated with opposite counsels. They laid the blame of the war with Mafliniffa on Hasdrubal and his abettors, whom they ordered into exile; but, without coming to any other resolutions, sent a deputation, with full powers to conclude as cir- cumftances might seem to require, and agree to whatever they should find most expedient for the commonwealth. These deputies, on their ar- rival at Rome, finding no disposition in the Senate to treat with them upon equal terms, resolved to arrest, by the most implicit fubmiflion, the sword that was lifted up againit their country. They ac- cordingly confessed the imprudence of their late condut, and implored forgiveness. They quoted the sentence of banishment passed upon Hasdrubal and his party, as an evidence of their contrition for
the o the hostilities lately offered to Massinissa; and they  made a formal surrender of their city and its
territory to be disposed of at the pleasure of the Romans.
In return to this act of fubmiflion, they were told, that the Romans approved their behaviour. and meant to leave them in possession of their freedom, their laws, their territory, and of all their effects, whether private or public: but, as a pledge of their compliance with the measures that might be neceflary to prevent the return of former putes, they demanded three hundred hostages, the children of Senators, and of the first families in Carthage. This demand being reported in the city gave a general alarm; but the authors of rhefe counsels were too far advanced to recede. They tore from the arms of their parents the children of the first families in the commonwealth; arid, amidst the cries of affliEtion and despair, embarked those hoflages for Sicily. Upon this island they were delivered over to the Roman Consuls, and were by them sent forward to Rome.
The commanders of the Roman armament, without explaining themselves any further, tinued their voyage, and, by their appearance on the coast of Africa, gave a fresh alarm at Car- thage. Deputies from the unfortunate inhabitants of that place went to receive them at Utica, and were told, that they must deliver up all their arms, flips, engines of war, naval and military stores. Even there alarming commands they received as the itrokes of fate, which could not be avoided:  We do not mean, said one of the deputies,  to dispute your commands; but we entreat you  to confider, to what a helpless state you are  about to reduce an unfortunate people, who,  by this hard condition, will be rendered un-  able to preserve peace among their own citizens  at home, or to defend themselves against the
' meanest
 meanest invader from abroad. We have ba A   nifhed Hasdrubal, in order to receive you: we  have declared him an enemy to his country,  that you might bs our friends: but when we are disarmed, who can prevent this exile from returning to occupy the city of Carthage against you? With twenty thousand men that follow him, if he comes into the directionof our go- ' vernment, he will soon oblige us to make war on you  . In answer to this piteous expoflu- lation, the Roman generals undertook the protec- of Carthage, and- ordered commiffaries to ceive the several articles that were to be delivered up, and to fee- the arsenals and the docks destroyed. It is reported, that there were delivered up to these commiffaries forty thousand suits of armour, twenty thousand katapulte, or large engines of war, with a plentiful itore of darts, arrows, and other misfiles. So far the Romans proceeded with caution, well knowing the veneration which mankind entertain for the feats and tombs of their ancestors, with the shrines and consecrated temples of their gods; and dreading the effects of despair, as soon as the Car- thaginians should perceive how much they were to be affected in their private and public property. But now, thinking their object secure, they ceeded to declare their intentions. The Consul called the Carthaginian deputies into his pretence, and beginning with an exhortation, that they should bear with equanimity what the neceflity of their fortune imposed, intimated, as the definitive refo- lution of the Roman Senate, that the people of Carthage should relinquish their present situation, and build on any other part of their territory, not less than eighty fiadia, or about ten miles, moved from the sea. The amazement and sorrow"
"  Polyb. Excerpt. Legat  142.  1. with"
"B OK with which these orders were received, justified the"
"n . precautions which the Romans had taken to secure ~~' the execution of them. The deputies threw them-
selves upon the ground, and endeavoured, from motives of pity, or of reason, to obtain a revo- cation of this cruel and arbitrary decree. They pleaded the merit of their implicit submission, their weakness, their inability any longer to alarm the jealousy of Rome, circumvented, disarmed, bound to their duty by hostages the most precious blood of their commonwealth. They pleaded the faith which was plighted by the Romans, the hopes of protection they had given, and the reputation they had justly acquired, not only for national justice, but for clemency and generosity to all who sued for mercy. They pleaded the refpe which all nations owed to the shrines and the consecrated temples of their gods; the deplorable state into which numbers of their people muit be reduced, expelled from their habitations and immoveable pofeflions, the principal articles of their property, and the hopeless condition of others, who, inured to subsist by the advantages of a maritime fitua-  were entirely disqualified to support them- selves or their children at a distance from the sea.
The Roman Consul replied by repeating the express orders of the Senate, and bid the Cartha- ginians remember, that the flates were composed of men, not of ramparts and walls. That the Roman Senate had promised to spare and protet the republic of Carthage; and that they had ful- filled this engagement by leaving the people in pofieflion of their freedom and their laws. That the sacred places should remain untouched, and that the shrines of the gods would still be with- in the reach of their pious visits. That the tance to which it was proposed to remove Carthage from the sea was not so great as the diflance at which Rome herself was situated from it; and that
the
the Romans had taken their resolution, that thee A  people of Carthage should no longer have under 1 their immediate view that element which opened a way to their ambition, had tempted them first to Sicily, afterwards into Spain, and last of ail into Italy, and to the gates of Rome; and which would never cease to suggest projeds dangerous to them- selves, and inconfillent with the peace of mankind. We go then, said the deputies of Carthage, to certain death, which we have merited by having persuaded our fellow-citizens to resign themselves into the hands of the Romans. But if  you mean to have your commands obeyed, you  must be ready to enforce themf; and by this  means you may save an unfortunate people from exposing themselves, by any at ofdefpair, to  worse sufferings than they have yet endured. The deputies accordingly, being followed at a dillance by twenty galleys of the Roman fleet, set fail for Carthage. They were received on the Ihore by muiltitudes, who crowded to hear the fult of their negociations; but the silence they served under pretence that it was necessary to make their report first to the Senate, spread a ge- neral dismay. In the Senate their message was ceived with cries of despair, which soon conveyed to the people in the itreets a knowledge of the conditions imposed upon them. And this nation, who, about forty years before, had consented to betray their principal citizen into the hands of their enemy, and who had lately resigned all the honours and pretensions of a free itate, now kindled into rage at the thoughts of being obliged to forego so great a part of their wealth, and to remove their habitations. They burst into the place where the Senate was assembled, and laid violent hands on all the members who had advised or borne any part in the late degrading fubmiflions, or who had contributed to bring the state into its present help-"
"S 2 les"
"B O less condition. They took vengeance, as is com-"
"Ii mon with a corrupted populace, on others, for - ' faults in which they themselves had freely concur-"
"red; and, as awake to new sentiments of honour, they reviled the spirit of their own commonwealth, ever ready to barter national character for profit, to purchase safety with shameful conceltions, and to remove a present danger, by giving up whatis the only security of nations againti any danger, the reputation of their vigour, and the honour of their arms."
"While the multitude indulged themselves in every species of riot, a few had the precaution to Ihut the gates, to firetch the chain which proteced the entrance of the harbour, and to make a collec- of stones on the battlements, there being the only weapons they had left to repel the first attacks of the Romans. The remains of the Senate too, without reflecting on the desperate irate of their affairs, resolved on war. Despair and frenzy fuc- ceeded in every breast to dejetion and mean- ness."
"Aifemblies were called to reverse the sentence of banishment lately pronounced against Hasdrubal, and against the troops under his command. These exiles were entreated to hafien their return for the defence of a city bereft of arms, ships, military and naval stores. The people, in the mean time, with an ardor which reason, and the hopes of fuc- cess during the prosperity of the republic could not have inspired, endeavoured to replace the arms and the flores which they had so shamefully surrendered. They demolished their houses to supply the docks with timber. They opened the temples and other public buildings to accommo- date the workmen; and, without diflinfion of sex, condition, or age, became labourers in the public works, collected materials, furniihed visions, or bore a part in any labour that was"
"thought"
"thought neceflary to put the city in a slate of A '. fence. They supplied the founders and the ar-__. mourers with the brass and iron of their domeitic utensils; or, where these metals were deficient, brought what they could furnish of silver and gold. They joined, with the other materials which. were used in the roperies, their hair to be spun into cordage for the shipping, and into braces for their engines of war. The Roman Consuls, apprised of what was in agitation, willing to await the returns of reason, and to let these first ebullitions of frenzy subside, for some days made no attempts on the city. But hearing of the approach of Hasdrubal, they thought it necelfary to endeavour, before his arrival, to possess themselves of the gates. Having in vain attempted to scale the walls, they were obliged to undergo the labours of a regular fege ; and though they made a breach, were repulsed in attempting to force the city by itorm."
"Hasdrubal had taken post on the creek which separated the penintlla of Carthage from the tinent, maintained his communication by water, and supplied the inhabitants with provisions and arms. The Romans, feeing that they could not reduce the city while Hasdrubal retained this post, endeavoured to dislodge him, but were defeated, and obliged to raise the siege. They had already spent two years in this enterprize, changed their commanders twice, but without advancing their fortunes. They began to incur the discredit of having formed against a neighbouring common- wealth an invidious design which they could not accomplish. Enemies in every quarter, Greece, Macedonia, and Spain, were encouraged to  clare againlt them; and even Mallinifla, unwilling to fee their power fubfiituted for that of Carthage, and jealous of the avidity with which they endea- voured to become maiters in Africa, and to snatch"
"ftoit"
"Bo Kfrom his hands a prey in which he thought himself"
"_ intitled to share, withdrew his forces, and left them"
"'singly to contend with the difficulties in which they began to be involved."
"But the Romans were animated by those morti- fications which are apt to discourage other nations. They imputed the miscarriage of their troops to the misconduct of their generals; and they cla- moured for a better choice. Scipio, by birth the son of Emilius Paullus, and by adoption the grandson of Scipio Africanus, having diftinguifled himself in Spain and in Africa, and being then ar- rived from the army to solicit the office of Edile, was thought worthy of the supreme command; but being about ten years under the legal age, the law was suspended in his favour, and his appoint- ment to the province of Africa, in preference to his colleague, was declared without the usual me- thod of casting lots."
"The Carthaginians were now reinflated in their consideration, and in their rank among nations, and had negociations with the neighbouring pow- ers of Mauritania and Numidia, whole aid they so- licited with alarming reflections on the boundlefl ambition, and invidious policy of the Romans. They even conveyed afiurances of support to the Achans, to the pretended Philip, an impostor, who, about this time, laid claim to the throne of Macedonia; and they encouraged with hopes of affiflance the fuiiec-ts of that kingdom, who were at this time in arms to recover the independence of their monarchy."
"The mere change of the commander, and better di;fipline in the Roman army, however, soon al- tered the fiate and prolpefts of the war. The first object of Scipio was to cut off the communications es the Carthaginians with the country, and to tercept their supply of provisions and other articles recetilry to withfiand a siege."
"Carthage"
"Carthage was situated at the bottom of a fpaci- A  ous bay, covered on the weft by the promontory 1 of Apollo, on the east, by that of Hermes or Mer- cury, at the diflance of about fifteen leagues from each other. The city flood on a peninsula joined to the main land by an ifihmus about three miles in breadth, and covering a baron or harbour, in which their docks and their shipping were secured from storms and hostile attacks. The Byrfa, or citadel, commanded the isthmus, and presented, at this only entrance to the town by land, a wall thirty feet thick and sixty feet high. The whole circumference of the place was above twenty miles  . .The besiegers, by their shipping, had access to that of the town on which the walls were wash- by the sea; but were shut out from the harbour by a chain which was stretched across the entrance. Hasdrubal had taken poll on the baron over againfi the town, and by there means fiill preserved the communication of the city with the country. Scipio, to diifodge him from this post, made a feint at a diflant part of the fortifications to scale the walls, acually gained the battlements, and gavre an alarm which obliged the Carthaginian general to throw himself into the city. Scipio, (atisfied with having obtained this end, took polfellion of the poll which the other had abandoned; and now master of the itihmus, and the whole tinental of the harbour, advanced to the walls of the Byrfa. In his camp he covered himself ;as usual with double lines; one facing the fortificati- ons of the enemy, confiting of a curtain twelve feet high, with towers at proper intervals, of which one in the centre was high enough to overlook the ramparts, and to afford a view of the enemy' works. The other line secured his rear from litr-"
"  Orolius,  . ci . zz.  Ep:tomc,  li."
"plriz"
"B1 0 0 prize on the of the country; and both effeau."
" ally guarded the isthmus, and obftruded all access
to the town by land.
The besieged, however, fill received some sup. ply of provisions by sea; their victuallers took the benefit of every wind that blew fresh and right into the harbour, to pass through the enemy fleet, who durst not unmoor to pursue them; and Scipio, to cut off this resource, projected a mole from the main land to the point of the peninsula across the entrance of the harbour. He began to throw in his materials on a foundation of ninety feet, with an intention to contract the mound as it rose to twenty-four feet at the top. The work, when firlt observed from Carthage, was confidered as a vain undertaking; but dwhen it appeared to advance with a sensible progress, gave a serious alarm.
The Carthaginians, to provide against the evils which they began to foresee from this obftruclion at the entranze of their harbour, undertook a work more difficult, and more vast than even that of the besiegers, to cut across the peninsula within their walts, and to open a new passage to the sea; and lhis they had actal!ly accomplished by the time ti.at the other paiTage was shut. Notwithstanding the late surrender of all their thipping and itores, they had at the fame time, by incredible efforts, a-tembled or constructed a navy of sixty gallies.
itih this force they were ready to appear in the bay, whiie the Roman (hips lay unmanned and unrigged, secure againlt any danger from an ene- .:- wihom the- iilppofed shut up by impenetrable i tr.; and in these circumstances, if they had avail- Cd !iemfe' ves of the furprize with which they might ve attacked their enemy, must have done great excc: ion on the Roman fleet. But having spent is than two days in clearing their new pafiage .iter it as known to be open, and in preparing : .,; . ;:, ;hey gave the enemy likewise full time
to
to prepare. On the third they engaged, fought thec A  whole day without gaining any advantage; and, in 1. their retreat at night, suffered greatly from the ene- my, who pressed on their rear. While the besiegers endeavoured to obftrut this new communication with the sea, the besieged made a desperate attempt on their works by land. A numerous body of men, devoting their lives for the defence of their country, without any arms, and provided only with matchess, crossed the har- bour, and, exposing themselves to certain death, set fire to the engines and towers of the besiegers; and, while they were surrounded and put to the sword, willingly perished in the execution of their purpose. In such operations the summer elapsed; and Scipio, with the loTs of his engines, and a renewal of all the difficulties which he had formerly to en- counter at sea, contenting himself with a blockade for the winter, discontinued the siege. His command being prolonged for another year, he resumed his attack in the tpring; and, finding the place greatly reduced by despair and famine, he forced his way by one of the docks, where he observed that the battlements were low and un- guarded. His arrivalin the itreets did not put him in polfeffion of the towxn. The inhabitants, during fix days, disputed every house and every palfage, and fucceflively let fire to the buildings whenever they were obliged to abandon them. Above fifty thousand persons of different sexes, who had taken refuge in the citadel, at last accepted of quarter, and were led captive from thence in two separate divisions, one of twenty-five thousand women, and another of thirty thousand men. Nine hundred deserters, who had left the Ro- man army during the siege, having been refused the quarter which was granted to the others, took poll in a temple which {food on an eminence, with
a refolu- o Ka resolution to die with swords in their hands, and
'-. with the greatest effusion of blood to their enemies.
To these Hasdrubal, followed by his wife and his children,joined himself; but not having the courage to pelfift in the fame purpose with there deserters, he left the temple, and accepted of quarter. His wife, in the mean time, with more ferocity or mag- nanimity than her husband, laid violent hands on her children, and, together with their dead bodies, threw herfeif into the flame of a burning ruin. The deserters too, impatient of the dreadful ex- petations which they felt, in order to hafien their own fate, set fire to the temple in which they had fought a temporary cover, and perished in the flames.
The city continued to burn during seventeen days; and all this time the soldiers were allowed to seize whatever they could save from the flames, or wrest from the hands of the dying inhabitants, who .ere fiill dangerous to those who approached them. Scipio, in beholding this melancholy scene, is said to have repeated fiom Homer two lines containing a prophecy of the fall of Troy.  To whom do ' you now apply this prediction ? said Polybius, who happencd to be near him;  To my own"
"country, he said,  for her too I dread in her ' turn the reverSes of human fate  . Scipio let:er to the Senate is said to have tained no more than these words:  Carthageis  taken. The army waits for your further orders. The tidings 'ere received at Rome with unconm- mon demonfirations of joy. The -vitors, recol- lecting all the rpasiages of their former wars, the alarms that had been given by Hannibal, and the irreconciieablc antipathy of the two nations, gave orders to raze the fortifications of Carthage, (;! So- he : .:'- ,.: ;:',: ici  'on of Carthage, fee the authorc abo;'"
"~'~.:- ~ a~.~ ~ -_~::- ~ _sn!"
"and even to destroy the materials of which theyc A  were built. A commission was granted by the Senate to ten of its members to take poffeflion of territories which were thus deprived of their sovereign, to model the form of this new province, and to pare it for the reception of a Roman governor. And thu% Carthage, the only inflance in which the human genius ever appeared greatly diflinguiflied in Africa; the model of magnificence, the repofi- tory of wealth, and one of the principal states of the ancient world, was no more. The Romans, incited by national animosity, and an excess of jealousy, formed a design more cruel towards their lival than at first view it appeared to be, and in the execution of it became ators in a scene of hor- ror far beyond their original intention. By the milder law and pracice of modern nations, we are happily exempted from the danger of ever feeing such horrid examples repeated, at least in any part of the western world."
"While the event of this mighty siege was still in dependence, the Romans had other wars to main- tain on the of Macedonia and Greece, where ,the natural progress of their policy, suited to the meafiures which they had taken with other nations: now ended in the open and avowed usurpation of a sovereignty which they had long disguised under the specious titles of alliance and protection."
"Macedonia being.ili fitted to retain the republican form into which it had been cast by the Romans, after some years of difiraction, and an attempt at lait in favour of a pretended for of the late king, to recover its independence and its monarchy, un- derwent a second conquest."
"Andrifcus, an African of uncertain extraction, being observed to resemble the royal family of Mla- cedonia, had the courage, under the name of Phi- lip, to personate a Ion of that unfortunate monarch,"
"and"
"B o and to make pretensions to the crown. With this $.*, object in view he went into Syria to solicit the aid"
"of Demetrius, but was, by this prince, taken into custody, and transported in chains to Rome. The Romans paid little regard to so contemptible an enemy, and even allowed him to escape. After this adventure, the fame impotRor appeared a fe- cond time in Macedonia, and, with better fortune than he had in the firfi attempt, drew to his fian- dard many natives of that country and of Thrace. In his first encounter he even defeated Juventius the Roman Praetor, and was acknowledged king; but soon after fell a prey to Metellus, and fur- nifhed the Romans with an obvious pretence for reducing the kingdom of Macedonia to the ordina- ry form of a province."
"The fiates of the Achban league, at the fame time, being already on the decline, haflened, by the temerity and difiraftion of their own coun- cils, the career of their fortunes to the fame termi- nation."
"The Romans, even while they fiuffered this fa- mous republic to retain the shew of its indepen- dence, had treated its members in many particu- lars as subjects. At the close of the war with Per- feus, they had cited to appear at Rome, or taken into custody as criminals of state, many citizens of Achaia, who had, in that conteLf, appeared to be difarfected to the Roman cause. Of there they had detained abot, ?. thou.and in different prisons of Italy, until, as  a period of seventeen years, about three hundred of thner, who survived their finement, we:- fit at liberty, as having already farered enough; or as being no longer in conditi- on to give a umbrage to Rome (q). Polybius being of this number acquired, during his flay in Italy, that knowledge of Roman affairs which ap-"
"'  .' a  ) , : Ashzpcis."
"pears"
"pears so conspicuous in the remains of his hiffory A  When at liberty, he attached himself to Scipio, the son of Emilius, and being well versed in the active scenes which had recently palt in his own country, and being entirely occupied with reflections on matters of state and of war, no doubt contri- buted by his intiructions in preparing this young man for the eminent services which he afterwards performed. The Romans, while they detained so many Greek prisoners in Italy, in a great measure at- fumed the adminifiration of affairs in Greece, posed of every diftintion, whether of fortune or power, and confined there advantages to the advo- cates of their own cause, and to the tools of their own ambition  . They received appeals from the judgments of the Achaean council, and encou- raged its members, contrary to the express condi- tions of their league, to fend separate embaflies to Rome. The fleps which followed are but imper- fetly marked in the fragments of hiflory which late to this period. It appears that the Spartans, having been forced into the Achaan confederacy, continued refractory in moRt of its councils. By some of their complaints at Rome, they obtained a deputation, as usual, from the Senate to hear par- ties on the spot, and to adjufi their differences. The Achzan council, incensed at this insult which was offered to their authority, without waiting the arrival of the Roman deputies, proceeded to en- force their own decrees againfi the republic of Sparta, marched an army into Laconia, and  feated with some slaughter, at the gates of Lacede- mon, the inhabitants of that city who ventured to oppose them. The Roman commiflioners arriving after there holtilities had commenced, summoned the parties to assemble at Corinth, and, in name of"
"  polyb. Ercerpt. Legat.  xo3."
"the"
"o o the Senate, gave sentence, that Lacedemon, Co-"
"l- rinth, Argos, Heraclea, and Orchomenos, not"
"having been original members of the Achalan federacy, should now be disjoined from it; and that all the cities which had been rescued from the dominion of Philip, should be left in full poffellion of their freedom and independency."
"Multitudes from all the different states of the league being on this occasion assembled at Corinth, a great riot ensued. The Roman deputies were fulted and obliged to leave the place; and in this manner commenced a war in which the Romans, because they hoped to establish their sovereignty in Greece without any convulsion, and had full em- ployment for their forces in Africa, Spain, and Macedonia, engaged with great reluctance. They renewed their commiflion, and named other depu- ties to terminate the disputes in Achaia; but the fiates of the Achaan league, imputing their duct in this particular to fear, and to the ill slate of their affairs in Africa, while Carthage was likely to repel their attack, thought that they had found an opportunity to exclude for ever from their councils the overbearing influence of this arrogant nation  . They were encouraged with hopes of support from Thebes, Eubcea, and other districts of Greece, where the people were averse to the dominion of the Romrans; and they therefore assembled an ar- my to afiert their common rights, and to enforce their authority over the several members of their own confederacy."
"Unfortunately for their cause, Metellus had then prevailed in Macedonia, and was at leisure to turn his forces againlt them. He accordiingly moved towards the Peloponnefus, still giving the Achaeans an option to avert the calamities of war, by sub- mitting to the mandates of the Roman Senate."
"(:) Fo;yb. Excerpt. Legt, . 144."
"These,"
"These, he said, were no more, than that they A  should desist from their pretensions on Sparta, and the other cantons who applied for the proteaion of ' Rome. But the Achaeans thought it safer to refitl, than to be disarmed under these fiale pretences; they took the field, passed through the isthmus of Co- rinth, and, being joined by the Thebans, marched to Thermopyla with a view to defend this entry into Greece. In this, however, they were diiap- pointed, being either prevented from seizing the pass, or driven from thence by Metellus. They were afterwards intercepted in their retreat through Phocis, where they loll their leader Critolaus, with a great part of his army  . Diaus, who fuc- ceeded him as head of the confederacy, alfembled a new force, confiting of fourteen thousand foot and fix thousand horse, took post on the ifihmus of Corinth, and sent four thousand men for the defence of Megara, a place which still made a part in the expiring confederacy of independent Greeks."
"Metellus, who after his viEtory had made him- self maiter of Thebes, advanced to Megara, lodged the Achaans from thence, and continued his march to the iithmus. Here he was superseded by Mummius, the Consul of the present year, who, with the new levies from Rome, made up an ar- my of twenty-three thousand foot and three thou- iand five hundred horse. The enemy, having gained an advantage over his advanced guard, were encouraged to hazard a battle under the walls of Corinth, and were defeated. The greater part fled into the town, but afterwards in the night withdrew from that place. Their general Dieus fled from the field of battle to Migalopolis, whither he had sent his family; having killed his wife, to"
"  Orofi     3. Pausanias is Achaicis."
"prevent"
"n o Kprevent her falling into the hands of the enemy, he"
"- himself took poison, and died.
Such are the imperfect accounts which remain of the last efforts made by the Greeks to preserve a freedom, in the exercise of which they had aced so distinguished a part. As they never were fur- passed by any race of men in the vigour with which they supported their republican efiablifhments, so they appeared to retain their ingenuity and their ikill in many arts, after they had loft the military and political spirit which constitutes the strength and security of nations; and in this latter period, which preceded their extinction, as the Achaean league was dissolved on having incurred the resent- ment of the Romans, so the unhappy remnant of the Spartan republic perished in having accepted their protection. The enmity and the friendship of the Romans being equally fatal, these and every other slate or republic of Greece, from this time forward, ceased to be numbered among nations, having fallen a prey to a power, whose force nothing could equal but the ability and the cunning with which it was exerted.
Such at leafi is the comment which we are tempt-  by the conduct of the Romans, on the sent occasion, to make on that policy, with which, about fifty years before this date, Flamininus, to detach the Grecian cities from Philip, proclaimed, with so much ostentation at the ifihmus of Corinth, general independence, and the free exercise of their own laws to all the republics of Greece. That People when they meant to ingratiate themselves, furpaiTed every fiate in generosity to their al- lies, they gained intire confidence, and taught nations, who were otherwise in condition to main- tain their own independence, to rely for protection on that very power from which they had most to fear for their liberties; and in the end, under some pretence of ingratitude or affront, fiript of every
right
right those very ilates who had most plentifullyc A  shared in their bounty. In this policy there were ' some appearances of a concerted design, which -' wasat one time liberal and generous beyond ex- ample, at another time cruel and implacable in the opposite extreme, equally calculated to gain Or to terrify, in the cafes to which either species of po- licy was suited. It is however probable, that they were led by the changing tfate of their interefls; and followed the conjuncture without any previous design. In this fort of conduct the paflions are wonderfully ready to in support of the judg- ment; and we may venture to admit, that the Romans sometimes felt the generosity which they profelled to employ, and of which the belief was bo favourable to the success of their affairs. In a different conjuncture, in which they were no long- er equally obliged to manage the temper of their allies, they became more impatient of contradic-  and gave way to their resentment on any the fighteft occasions, or to their ambition, without controul. Their maxim to spare the fubmifive, and to reduce the proud  , whether founded in sentiment or cunning, was a principle productive of the extremes of.generofity and arrogance ob- served in their conduct, it led them by degrees to assume a superiority in every tranlaCtion, and as their power increased, rendered this power portionally dangerous to other nations."
"On the third day after the action which hap- pened in the isthmus of Corinth, the victorious ge- neral entered the city; and confidering that the inhabitants had a principal part in the late insult offered to the Roman commiflioners, determined to firike a general terror into all the members of the league by the severities to be executed against this people. Mummius, though with the reft of"
"  Parcere fubjeais, & debellare fup-rbos.   his"
"'s o 0K his countrymen of this age, ill qualified io diflin- _ ,^ guifh the elegant workmanship of the Grecian ar-"
"tifts  , of which great collections had been made at Corinth, ordered all the statues and pic- tures to be let apart for his triumph; and with this reserve, gave the town, abounding in all the ac- commodations and ornaments of a wealthy me- tropolis, to be pillaged by the soldiers. He razed the walls, and reduced the city to ashes."
"Thus Corinth perished in the fame year with Carthage. The fortifications of Thebes, and of some other towns difaffeaed to the Romans, were at the fame time demolished; and the arrange- ments to be made in the country of Greece were committed to deputies from the Roman Senate. By their order, the Achaean league was dissolved, and all its conventions annulled. The states which had composed it were deprived of their sovereignty, subjected to pay a tribute, and placed under the government of a person annually sent from Rome with the title of the Praxtor of Achaia  ."
"The Romans now appeared openly, perhaps for the first time, in the capacity of conquerors. The acquisition of revenue in Macedonia, which, about twenty years before this date, had first taught them to exempt themselves from taxation, excited from thenceforward an insatiable thirst of dominion; and their future progress is marked by the detail of wars which they maintained on their frontier, not in defence of the empire, but for the enlarge- ment of possessions already too great."
"In Spain where they fiill met with refiflance, they had acted in all the different periods of their wars, either on the offensive or defensive, accord-   He delivered them to the masters of Ihips, with hi. famous threat, that if any of thfe curiosities were loft, they [hould be oblicgd to replace them. (  Paufania,    ;6. Polyb. Excerptz Vinuilbus & Vitii.s"
"ing"
"ing as the Siate, was or was not, at leifire fronm A  the pressure of their enemies, or according as the ._. generals she employed Were ambitious: pacific."
"On the conclusion of the peace with Philip, the Roman territory in Spain had been divided into two provinces, and furnished the fittioris of two separate commanders annually sent from Rome. On the renewal of the war in Macedonia, and du- ring the continuance of it, these provinces were again united under one government. But upon the defeat of Perseus, and the reducion of Ma- cedonia,- they were separated for ever."
"From that time the ambition of the Romans seems to have operated in Spain with the fame es- set as in other parts on the boundaries of their empire. They pressed upon the natives, not merely to secure their own territory from inroad and  predation, but to gain new acceflions'of dominion and wealth. They advanced to the Tagus, en- deavoured to penetrate the mountains beyond the sources of that river; and on that involved themselves in a continual firuggle of many years duration with the Lufitanians, Gallicians, and Cel- tiberi."
"In there wars the Roman officers were atuated, by their avarice as well as by their ambition, and were glad of occasions to quarrel with an enemy, amongst whom the-produce of rich mines of silver and of gold were known to abound, and where plentiful spoils were so likely to reward their ser- vices."
"The theatre of the war in Spain was not so fpicuous, nor the conduct of generals so firidtly observed, as they were in Africa, Asia, or Greece and such as were employed in that service, there- fore, the more to haflen their conquests, ventured upon ads of treachery or breach of faith with the cantons around them, Which the Senate did not commonly avow; and they also ventured upon"
"T a a&td"
": o ads of extortion and peculation in their own go.  vernments, which gave occasion to the first com-"
"plaints of this fort that were brought to Rome."
"The Proconsul Lucullus, having accepted of the surrender of a town, and being received into it in consequence of a capitulation, nevertheless put the inhabitants to the sword and carried off their effets. Galba, commanding in Lusitania, or the western province of Spain, soon afterwards circumvented, by a like as of perfidy and cruelty, tome of the inhabitants whom he could not otherwise reduce. These examples probably retarded, instead of for- warding, the progress of the Roman arms, and firmed that obstinate valour with which the natives of Spain disputed every post in defence of their country ; and with which they maintained the test against a fucceflion of Roman Generals, Pra- tors, or Consuls, who were employed to subdue them. This contest they continued or renewed, at short intervals, with various success, from the first expedition of the Scipios to the last of Augustus."
"At the beginning of the lat war with Carthage, the Lufitanians, incensed by the aA of treachery which was committed by the Roman general Galba, re-affernbled in numerous parties under Viriathus, who had himself escaped from the massacre on that occasion, and who entertained an implacable fentment to the authors of it. This leader, ac- cording to the Roman. historians, had been origi- nally a herdsman, afterwards a chief of banditti, and last of all the commander of an army which had often defeated the legions of Rome, and threatened their expulsion from Spain. He seems to have known how to employ the impetuous va- lour of a rude people against troops not less va- liant than his own countrymen, though more  pending on discipline; and to have pofleffed what the Spaniards retained, even down to the days of Cefar, the faculty of turning the want of order to"
"account"
"account against an enemy so much accutfomed toc A  order, as, in a great measure, to rely upon it in' most of their operations. With him an apparent rout and dispersion of his followers was the ordi- nary prelude to a violent attack; and he common- ly endeavoured, by pretended flights and difor- derly movements, to draw the enemy into rash pursuits or precipitant marches, and seized every advantage which they gave him with irresistible  dress and valour. He continued above ten years to baffle all the attempts which the Romans made to reduce Lusitania. He had projected a league and defensive confederacy with the other free na- tions of Spain, when he was affaflinated, as he lay asleep on the ground, by two of his own fol- lowers, supposed to be in concert with the Roman general."
"The Romans, upon this event, found the weft- ern and northern parts of Spain open to their roads. In little more than a year afterwards a Ro- man army under Brutus passed the Duero  , and penetrated quite to the coafi of Gallicia, from which they reported, with more than the embellishments and exaggerations of travellers, that the fun was seen from this difiant region, when he set in the evening, to fink and to extinguifl himself with a mighty noise in the Western Ocean."
"The natives of this country, however, did not think themselves subdued by being thus over-run. They retired, with their cattle and effeEts, into places of strength; and, when required to pay contributions, replied, That their ancestors had left them swords to defend their poffeflions, but not any gold to redeem them."
"Such were the occupations of the Roman arms in the western division of Spain, while they were equally engaged in the eastern province, under"
"  Durius."
"Cato"
"3 o KCato the Elder, Tiberius Gracchus, and others,"
" who endeavoured to secure what the State had al-
ready acquired, or to extend its limits. These ge- nerals obtained their several triumphs, and joined to the Roman poifeflions on the coast considerable acquisitions in the inland part of the country. Their progress, however, on this  had been greatly retarded by the obfiinate valour of the Nu- mantians and other cantons of the Celtiberi, who had maintained the contest during fifty years, and at last had formed a general confederacy of all the interior nations of Spain, to be conducted by Viri- athus, when their measures were broken by the death of that formidable leader.
Numantia was the principal firong hold, or, as we may conceive it, the capital of a small nation. Their lodgement, or township, was contained within a circumference of about three miles, situ- ated among the mountains of Celtiberia, or Old Castile, and at the confluence of the Durius with another river, both of which having seep banks, rendered the place, on two of its fides, of very ficult access. It was fortified on the third tide with a rampart and a ditch.
The people could muster no more than eight or ten thousand men; but there were greatly difiin- guifned by their valour, reputed superior in horse- manship to every other nation of Spain, and equal to the Romans in the use of the shield and the fiab- bing fvord. They had already gained many vic- tories over the Roman armies which had been em- ployed to reduce them. They had obliged Pom- pey, one of the Roman generals, contrary to the pracice of his country, to accept of a treaty, while the advantage of fortune was against him. They obliged the Consul Mancinus to save his army by a capitulation (a). Neither of thole
') Eut-or'i:,    8."
"treaties"
"treaties indeed were ratified by the Roman Senate, A  To expiate the breach of the last, the Consul Man- ' cinus, whp concluded it, together with Tiberius Gracchds his Queflor, were ordered to be delivered up to the. hands of the enemy, and to fiffer in their own persons for the failure of engagements which they could not fulfil. Tiberius Gracchus appealed to the people, was saved by their favour, and from this time is supposed to have received that bias which he followed in the fublequent part of his political conduc. Mancinus acquiesced in the lentence of the Senate, was presented naked and in fetters at the gates of Numantia, as a facri- fice to the resentment of that nation, for the breach of a treaty which the Romans determined not. to observe. But the vidlim was nobly rejeced, and the Numantians insisted on the conditions they had fiipulated, faying, that a public breach of faith could not be expiated by the suffering of a private man  ."
"These tranfa&ions passed about ten years after the deftruEion of Carthage, and the Romans, mortified -with the length and ill fuccels of the war with Numantia, had recourse again to the services of Scipio,"
"They had formerly dispensed, in his favour, with the law that required a certain age as a quali- fication for the office of Consul; and now, in order to: employ him a second time, they were obliged to suspend another law, which prohibited the eletion of the fame person into that office."
"Upon the arrival of Scipio in Spain, it is said .that he found the Roman army, discouraged by repeated defeats, withdrawn into fortified fiations at a diltanc from the enemy, detefiing the hard- lhips of a military camp, indulging themselves in all the vices of a disorderly town, and fulbjeEt to"
"(3) Appian Bcll. Hif'an.  302."
"panics"
"BOOK panics on the slightest alarm. It is said that"
" the cries, the aspec&, the painted visage, and the
long hair of the Spaniard were become objets of terror  .
Among the reformations which Scipio made to restore the vigour of the army, he cleared the camp of its unnecessary followers, amongst whom are mentioned women, merchants, arid fortune-tell- ers; he refiriced the quantity of baggage, reduced the fu. llttre of the kitchen to the spit and the pan; and the tables of officers to plain food, roasted or boiled Hie prohibited the use of bedfleads in camp, and fet'the example himself of sleeping on a straw mat'; likewise restrained the infantry from the use of horses on the march, and obliged them to carry their own baggage.
Though poffefled of superior numbers, he  clined a battle; and avoided every rout on which the enemy were prepared to receive him ; took  vantage of a superior address in managing his sources, andedamped the ardour of a fierce people by flow operations; 'he laid waste the country around them, and by degrees obliged them to tire within their own ramparts, and' to consume what was raised or provided within the circuit of their walls.
Scipio had been joined on his march to Numan- tia by Jugurtha, 'the grandson of Mafliniffa, who, on this service, made his first acquaintance with the Romans, and brought a reinforcement of twelve elephants, with a considerable body of horse, of archers and fingers. At its arrival the army amounted to sixty thousand men. But Scipio did not attempt to torm the town;' he took a number of polis which he fucceflively fortified',' and, by joining them together, completed'a double line of circumvaliation, equal in firength to the walls
  Floras.
which
which were opposed to him. He had his curtains A.  his towers, his places of arms corresponding tQ ^. those of the place; and he eitablifhed an order of service and a set of signals, in cafe of alarm by day or night, which resembled more the precau- tions of an army, on its defence, than the opera- tions of a siege. His intention was to reduce the Numantians by famine, an operation of time, du- ring which, from so warlike a nation, he might be exposed to surprise, or to the effects of despair. The place besieged being at the confluence of rivers navigable with small vessels, which descend- with great rapidity on the fiream, or which could with the. favour of proper winds, even mount in the fight of the enemy. The people, for a while, procured some supplies by water. Num- bers of them swimming with great address, and diving at proper places, to avoid being seen by the besiegers, fill passed through the lines, and served a communication with the country, until the rivers also were barred across their channels by timbers, that were armed with sword blades and spikes of iron.
The Numantians were still in hopes of succour from their allies. Five aged warriors undertook, each with his son for a second, to pass through the lines of the enemy, and to sue for relief from the neighbouring nations. They succeeded by night in the sirs part of their attempt, cut down the Ro- man guard, threw the camp into rome confusion, and escaped before the occasion of the alarm was known. But their cause was become desperate, and too likely to involve in certain ruin any friend who embraced it. Their suit, nevertheless, was attended to at Lutia, the head of a small canton, forty miles from Numantia.
The young men of this place took their resolution in favour of the injured Numantians; but Scipio had notice of their intention time enough to vent o vent its effect. He hastened to the place, and,
I. having accomplished this march of forty miles in  - eight hours, surprised the inhabitants, had four"
"hundred young men delivered up to him, and ordered their right arms to be struck off. By this dreadful at of severity, he secured himself from any danger on that quarter, and impressed the other ilates of that neighbourhood with terror."
"The Numantians, in the mean time, were pref- fed with famine, and having no hopes of relief, lent a deputation to try the clemency of their enemy.  What was once a happy fiate, they said,   tent with its own pofeflions, and secure in the  valour of its citizens, is now reduced to great  distress, for no other crime than that of having  maintained their freedom, and of having  fended their wives and children."
" For you, they continued, addressing them- selves to Scipio,  who yourself are said to possess  so many virtues, it would become you to es-  poufe the cause of this injured nation, and cure to them terms which they could with ho-  nour prefer to their present distresses. Their expectations are moderate, for they have felt the reverses of fortune. It is now in your pow- er to receive their fubmiflion under any tolerable conditions, or to fee them perish in some act of  despair, which may prove fatal to many of their enemies, as well as to themselves."
"Scipio replied, That he could not grant them any terms; that they mufi surrender at discretion."
"Upon the return of this answer they resumed their former obiiinacy, and held out until they had consumed every article of provision within their walls; endeavoured to turn their shields and other utenfi of leather into food, devoured the dead bodies, and even preyed on each other."
"The end of this piteous scene is variously reported By some i is said, that, in the last flage of despair,"
"ths"
"the Numantians sallied forth to purchafeedeath by A  the laughter of their enemies; that, in the execu- . of this purpose, they for some time exposeded ihemfelves with the most frantic rage, till the great- er'part being slain, a few returned into the town, let fire to the houses, and, with their wives and children, perished in the flames  . By others it is said, that they agreed to furren- der on a certain day, but that when this day came they begged for another; alleging, that many of their people, yet fond of liberty, had determined to die, and wished for one day more, that they might the more deliberately execute their purpose. Such was the aversion to surrender at diicretion, which the fear of captivity, and that of its ordinary consequences among ancient nations, had inspired. The few of this high-minded people who survived the effects of despair, falling into the enemy hands, were ttripped of their arms. Fifty were served, as a specimen of the whole, to adorn the viftor triumph. The remainder were fold for slaves, and the walls of their firong hold were le- velled with the ground. The prilbners, even after they had laid down their arms and Submitted to mercy, retained the ferocity of their looks, and catl on their victors such glances of indignation and rage, as still kept the animosity of enemies awake, and prevented the returns of pity. As these particulars firongly mark the defects which still subsisted in the supposed law of war among ancient nations, the reader will probably bear with the (hock that is given to his feelings of compaf- sion, for the fake of the picture which it is necef- fary to give of the manners.of the times."
"If we judge of Numantia from the refinance it made to the Roman arms, it having been one of their most difficult conquefis, we must confider it"
"  Orofins    7. Florus,    18."
"as"
"B o as a state of considerable power. Its redustion"
"gave immediate respite from war in Spain. Scipio and Brutus returned nearly together from their vinces in that country, and had their separate tri- umphs in the fame year."
"These operations against Numantia, Carthage, Macedonia, and Greece, were accompanied with a revolt of the slaves in Sicily, and with a number of other wars less considerable in Illyricum, Thrace, and Gaul. Cf there the revolt of the slaves merits the greater attention, on account .of the view it gives of the state of the countries now under the immediate jurisdiction of Rome. The island of Sicily having been the first acquisition which the Romans made beyond the limits of Italy, had been for some time in a fiate of domestic tranquil- lity, and undisturbed by any foreign enemy. Its lands were become the property of Roman citi- zens, who here, as on their estates in Italy, culti- vated plantations to supply with corn, wine, and oil, the markets and granaries .of Rome. The  bour was performed by laves. These were led in chains to the fields, or confined in vaults and for- tified workhouses at the several tasks they were em- ployed to perform. As the proprietors of land had many reasons to prefer the labour of slaves to that of freemen, who were distracted by their poli- tical engagements, and fubje& to be called upon or pressed into the military service, the number of slaves continually increased. They were, for the most part, prisoners of war; and some of them being even of high rank, unused to fubmiflion, and animated with fierce paflions of indignation and scorn, were ready upon every favourable op- portunity, to take arms against their masters, and often to shake the fiate itself with a storm which was not foreseen until it atually burf."
"About ten years after the defirution of Car- hage, and four years before that of Numantia,"
"this"
"this injured class of men were incited to revoltc A  in Sicily by Eunus, a Syrian slave; who, at first, i_. under pretence of religion, and by the fame of miracles he was supposed to perform, tempted many to break from their bondage; traversed the country, broke open the vaults and prisons in which his fellow-fufferers were confined, and acu- ally assembled an army of seventy thousand men. With this force, in four fucceflive campaigns, he made a prosperous war on the Roman Praetors, and often stormed the entrenchments of theRoman camp."
"This leader, however, being ill-qualified to im- prove his vicories, and having no concerted plan for the government or fubfiilence of his followers, in a country that was gradually ruined by their own devafiations, was at length, by the caution and superior conduct of Perperna, or Publius Rutilius,. gradually circumscribed in his depreda- tions, defeated, and obliged to take refuge in En- na, a fortified place, where about twenty thousand of his followers were put to the sword, and the mainder, as an example to deter slaves from the commiflion of a similar offence, were nailed to the cross near the mofi frequented highways, and in the mod conspicuous parts of the island. .While the Roman armies were thus employed in the provinces, br on the frontier of their extensive conquefis, Italy itself had long enjoyed a perfect security, the lands were cultivated, and the country flocked with people, whether aliens or citizens, freemen or slaves. From about three hundred thousand  , which, in this period, were the ordina- ry return of the Census, the citizens soon after aug- mented to above four hundred thousand  ; and   Three hundred and twenty thousand.   Four hundred and twenty-eight thousand three hundred and forty- tv "
"Scipio,"
"B O KScipio, under whose infpeation as Censor this return"
"n1 . was made, hearing the Crier repeat the prayer"
"which was ufilal at the closing of the rolls,  That the republic might increase in the numbers of its ' people, and in the extent of its territory; bid him pray that it might be preserved, for it was al- ready great enough. It is probable that, in the view of this sagacious observer, the marks of cor- ruption already began to appear in the capital; and a  which iiill continued for a century to make fucn vigrous shoots from its branches already bore some marks of decay in its trunk.
The offices of State, and the government of vinces, to which those who had filled them fuc- ceeded, began to be coveted from avarice, as well as from ambition. Complaints of peculation and extortion, which were received about this time from Spain and Macedonia, pointed out the necef- fity of restraining such oppreflions, and fuggefled some penal laws, which were often, and in vain, amended and revived.
An aftion was instituted in favour of the provin- ces, againfi governors, or their attendants, who should be accused of levying money without the authority of the State, and an ordinaryjurildidtion was granted to one of the Praetors, to hear plaints on this fibjet. The penalty at first was no more than restitution, and a pecuniary fine; it was gradually extended to degradation, and exile.  604 These reformations are dated in the time of the LxCul^Pr-laft war with Carthage, and are ascribed to the mo- =dcRcp--. atl:i of Culpurnius Pifo, then one of the Tribunes. Q.ion- -Before this time all jurisdiction in criminal matters"
"belonged to the Tribunal of the People, and was exercised by themselves in their collective capacity, or occasionally delegated to a special commiflion. Few crimes were yet defined by statute, and ordi- nary courts of juffice for the trial of them were not"
"yet i"
"yet efiablifhed. In these circumstances criminals A  of slate had an opportunity not only to defend 1 themselves after a prosecution was commenc-  but likewise to employ intrigue, or exert their credit with the People, to prevent or evade a trial."
"To supply these defecs, a lift of statutory crimes now began to be made, and an ordinary jurifditi- on was eftablilhed. Besides extortion in the vinces, which had been defined by the law of Cul- purnius  , murder, breach of faith, robbery, as- fault, poisoning, incest, adultery, bribery, faire judgment, fraud, perjury,   were fucceflively joined to the lift; and an ordinary jurifdi&ion for the trial of such crimes was vested in ajury of Se- nators, over whom the Praetor, with the title of Qae- fitor, presided."
"The number of Prators, corresponding to this and other growing exigencies of the State, was now augmented to fix; and these officers, though destined, as well as the Consuls, to the command of armies and the government of provinces, began, during the term of their magiitracy, to have full occupation in the city. On this account it was not till after the expiration of the year for which they had been eleted, that they drew lots for a vince. A like policy was soon after adopted in the destination of Consuls, and all the other officers of State, who, being supposed to have sufficient occu- pation in Italy and Rome during the year of their appointment, were not destined to any foreign ser- vice till that year was expired."
"With these efiablifhments, calculated to secure the funtions of office, the ule of the ballot was troduced, firit in elections, and afterwards in col- leaing-opinions of judges in the courts of jus-   Parricidium, vis publica, latrocinium, icjuria, venificium, incelhlls adulteriurn; captz pecunie, corrupti judicii, falfi, perjurium."
"r:ce"
"B O Kice  : a dangerous form of proceeding in _._ ititutions tending to popular licence, and where"
"justice is more likely to susser from the unawed palflions of the lower people, than from any im- proper influence of superior rank; and where the authority of the wife, and the sense of public shame, were so much required, as principal supports of government."
"An occasion for the commission of new crimes is frequently taken from the precautions which are employed agairift the old. From the facility with which criminal accusations now began to be ceived, a new species of crime accordingly arose. Calumny and vexatious prosecutions commenced by disappointed competitors againfit perfcns in pub- lic truit, became so frequent as to require the terpofition of laws. On this account it was en- aced, upon the motion of Memmius, that all per- sons in office, or appointed to command in the vinces, might decline answering a criminal charge until the expiration of their term, or until their turn from the service to which they were deflin- (i); and persons of any denomination might have an action of calumny against the author of a false or groundless prosecution. Whoever was viced of this offence was to be branded in the face with the initials of his crime."
"By these eitablifhments the city of Rome, long resembling a mere military station, made some progress in completing the system and application of her laws. Literary productions, in some of their forms, particularly in the form of dramatic compositions, as hath been already observed, began to be known. The representation of fables was first introduced under pretence of religion, and practised as a sacred rite to avert the plague or some   Lex GCbinia Tabllaria.   Lex Miefman reis pQltulandis. Lex Cassia T3bellaris."
"public"
"public calamity. This entertainment was fondlyc A  received by the People, and therefore frequently i.. prelented to them by the Ediles, who had the charge of such matters. Literature, however, in some of its less popular forms, was checked, as a fourde of corruption. In the year of Rome fiveu.  592. hundred and ninety-two, that is, about eight years after the redu&ion of Macedonia, the Roman Se- nate, upon a report from  Pomponius, the Prae- tor, that the city was frequented by philosophers and rhetoricians, resolved that this officer, agreeably to hi eduty to the republic, (hould take care to move all such persons in the manner his own judg- ment should direct  ; and, in about fix years after this date, an embassy having come from Athens, composed of scholars and rhetoricians, who drew the attention of the' youth by the play of their talents, an uncommon dispatch was given to their business, that they might not have any pretence for remaining too long in the city."
"A proposal which was made during this period, to eret a theatre for the accommodation of the fpeEtators, at their public shews, was rejeated with great indignation, as an attempt to corrupt the manners.of the People. The materials which had been collected for this work were publicly fold, and an edict, at the fame time, was published, that no one should ever resume this design, or at- tempt to place any bench or feat for the accom- modation of the fpeEtators at any theatrical en- tertainment in the city, or within a mile of its walls (1).- It was thought an a& of effeminacy, it seems, for the Roman People to be feated; and it is undoubtedly wife, in matters of small mo- ment, however innocent, to forbid what is confider- as an evil, and, in remitting established feveri-   A. Gellius,    1. (1) Val. Maxim.    4. ' I. ties,"
"B o ties, to let the opinion of innocence at least precede ,._ .the indulgence."
"The sumptuary laws already mentioned, refpe entertainments and household expences, were, under the name of Didius, the person who proposed the renewal of them, revived  ; and, with some alterations, extended to all the Roman citizens perfed over Italy."
"Such was the antidote which the policy of that age provided, in the capital of a great empire, against luxury and the ofientation of wealth; tempers incident to prosperity itself, and not to be cured by partial remedies. They were by the Romans (who knew better how to accomplish the celebrated problem of Themifiocles, in making a fznallflate a great one, than they knew how to ex- plain the effects of its greatness) commonly im- puted to some particular circumstance, or acciden- tal event. To the spoils of Tarentum, they said, and of Asia  , to the deftrution of our princi- pal rivals the Carthaginians; to the mighty show of fiatues, pictures, and cosily furniture, which were brought by Mummius from Corinth, we owe this admiration of finery, and so vailing a passion for private as well as for public wealth."
"In this manner they explained the effects of progress which they themselves had made in the acquisition of so many provinces; in the grow security and riches of a mighty city, frorr which all foreign alarms were far removed; ant to which the wealth of a great empire, either in the form of private fortune or of public trea lure, began to flow with a continued and increafine itream  .    Didia. (.) Afi primum devica luxuriam rmfit in Italiam. Plin.  mxii.   (,)   xxxix.  6. Plin.  xxxvii.  I."
"CHAP"
"C A   Extent of the Roman Empire.--Political Charaler of its Head.-Facility with which it continued to  vance.-Change of Charafler, political as well as moral.-Charatter of the People or Commons.-. Dangerous Humours likely to break olut.-Appear- ance of Tibertis Gracchus.-- is projeit to revive the Law of Liciniuts.-Interceffon of the Tribune Otavius. he Republic divided.-Difputes in the Comitia.-Depofition of the Tribune Ot1avius.- Commissioners appointed for the Division of Lands. Tiberius Gracchus Jtes to be re-eleRted 'Tribune.- His Death.-Immediate Confequences.-Proceed- itgs of Carbo.-Embaffy of Scipio.--Foreign Affaits.-Violence of the Conmmfiioners.-Domeflie Affairs. IN the manner that has been summarily stated inc A "
"the preceding Chapters, the Romans completed . their political establishment, and made their firfit and their greatest advances to empire, without  parting from the policy by which they had been preserved in the infancy of their power. They were become sovereigns of Macedonia, Greece, Italy, part of Africa, Lusitania, and Spain; yet, even in this pitch of greatness, made no diftin&ion between the civil and military departments, nor gave to any citizen an exemption from the public service. They did not despise any enemy, neither in the measures they took, nor in the exertions they made to resist him: and as the fatal effects which they and all the other nations of the ancient world were long accultomed to expet from defeats, were no less than servitude or death, they did 2 not 0 not submit to any enemy, in consequence of any event, nor under the pressure of any calamity
whatever.
Other nations were accuflomed to rife on vito. ries, and to fink under defeats; to become insolent or mean with the tide of their fortunes. The Ro- mans alone were moderate in prosperity, and arro- gant when their enemies expected to force their fubmilfion.
Other nations, when in difrefs, could weigh their sufferings against the conceflions which they were required to make; and, among the evils to which they were exposed, preferred what appeared to be the least. The Romans alone spurned the advances of a viEtorious enemy; were not to be moved by sufferings; and, though they cautiously avoided difficulties that were likely to surpass their strength, did not allow it to be supposed that they were governed by fear in any cafe whatever. They willingly treated with the vanquished, and were ready to grant the most liberal terms when the conceflion could not be imputed to weakness or fear. By such free and unforced concessions, deed, they eflablifhed a reputation for generosity, which contributed, no less than their valour, to fe- cure the dominion they acquired.
With the fame insinuating titles of allies or teaors, by which they had, in the infant slate of their policy, brought all the cantons of Latium to follow their fiandard; they continued to take the ascendant over nations whom they could not have otherwise subdued. But as they were liberal in their friendships, so, after repeated provocations seemed to jufify a different conduct, they were terrible in their resentments, and took ample compensation for the favours they had formerly bestowed.
By their famous maxim in war already menti- oned, That the fitbmilfive were to be spared, and
the
the proud to be humbled, it became necessary forc A  them, in every quarrel, to conquer or to perish;, and, when these were the alternatives proposed by them, other nations were intitled to confider them as common enemies. No State has a right to make the fubmiflion of mankind a necessary dition to its own preservation ; nor are many States qualified to support such pretensions. Some part of this political charaaer, however, is necessary to the safety, as well as to the advancement of nati- ons. No free State or Republic is safe under any other government or defence, than that of its own citizens. No nation is safe that permits any ally to susser by having espoused its cause, or that al- lows itself to be driven, by defeats or misfor- tunes, into a surrender of any material part of its rights."
"The measure of the Roman conquests, in the beginning of the seventh century of Rome, though great, was yet far from being full; and the Peo- ple had not hitherto relaxed the indufiry, nor cool- in the ardour with which prosperous nations  vance, but which they frequently remit in the height of their attainments and of their power."
"The conffitution of the commonwealth still as- forded a plentiful nursery of men for both the ci- vil and military departments; and this People ac- cordingly continued for some time to advance with a quick pace in the career of their conquefis. They subdued mighty kingdoms with as great, or greater facility, than that with which they had for- merly conquered villages and single fields."
"But the enlargement of their territory, and the success of their arms abroad, became the sources of a ruinous corruption at home. The wealth of vinces began to flow into the city, and filled the coffers of private citizens, as well as those of the commonwealth. The offices of State and the command of armies were become lucrative as well"
"as"
"B o ' as honourable, and were coveted on the former"
". account. In the State itself the governing and the '~' governed felt separate interests, and were at vari-"
"ance, from motives of avarice, as well as am- bition; and, initead of the parties who formerly strove for diiinEtion, and for the palm of merit in the service of the commonwealth, factions arose, who contended for the greatest share of its spoils, and who sacrificed the public to their party-attach- ments and animofities."
"Two hundred and thirty years had elapsed since the animofities of Patrician and Plebeian were ex- tinguifhed by the equal participation of public ho- nours. This diftination itself was in a great mea- fare obliterated, and gave way to a new one, which, under the denominations of Nobles and Commons, or lluftrious and Obscure, without volving any legal disparity of privileges, gave rife to an aristocracy, which was partly hereditary, founded in the repeated fucceflion to honours in the fame family; and partly personal, founded in the habits of high fiation, and in the advantages of education, such as never fail to difiinguifl the conditions of men in every great and prosper- ous state."
"These circumstances conferred a power on the Nobles, which, though less invidious, was not less real than that which had been possessed by the an- cient Patricians. The exercise of this power was lodged with the Senate, a body which, though by the emulation of its members, too much disposed to war, and ambitious of conquest, was probably never surpassed in magnanimity, ability, or in ftea- diness, by any council of state whatever."
"The People had submitted to the Senate, as possessed of an authority which was founded in the prevailing opinion of their superior worth; and even the most aspiring of the Commons allowed *hemfelves to be governed by an order of men,"
"amongfl"
"amorigft whom they themselves, by proper efforts A  and suitable merit, might hope to arcend. The '* examples of preferment, and the rife of individu-''' als, from the lowell to the highest ranks of the commonwealth, though for the most part received with some degree of jealousy by those who were already in possession of the higher condition, were nevertheless frequent, and extinguished all ap- pearance of an exclusive pretension to the ho- nours of the State, in any order or class of the People."
"The Knights, or the Equefirian order, being persons possessed of estates or effe of a certain valuation (a), formed between the Senate and' the People an intermediate rank, who, in consequence of their having a capital, and being less. engaged than the Senators in affairs of State, became traders, contractors, farmers of the revenue, and constituted a species of moneyed interest in the city, and in the provinces."
"Such, during the latter part of the period of which the events have been already related, was the distribution of rank in this commonwealthi. But circumstances which appear to be fixed in the poli- tical slate of nations, are often no more than a pas- sage in the shifting of scenes, or a transition from that which a people have been, to what they are about to become. The Nobles began to avail themselves of the high authority and advantages of their tlation, and to accumulate property as well as honours. The country began to be occupied with their plantations and their ilaves. The num- ber of great landed estates, and the multiplication of slaves, kept pace together. This manner of flocking plantations was necessary or expedient in the circumstances of the Romans: for if the Ro- man citizen, who pofleifed so much consequence"
"(a) 400,000 Roman money, or about 3,o0ol."
"in"
"B o0 Kin his military and political capacity, had been"
" willing to become a hireling and a servant, yet it
was not the interest of masters to entrust their as- fairs to persons who were liable to be pressed into the legions, or who were so often called away to the comitia and assemblies of the People.
Citizens contended for offices in the State as the road to lucrative appointments abroad; and when they had obtained this end, and had reigned for a while in some province, they brought back from their governments a profusion of wealth ill acquir-  and the habit of arbitrary and uncontrouled command. When disappointed in the purfiits of fortune abroad, they became the leaders of dan- gerous factions at home; or when suddenly pof- sessed of great wealth, they became the agents of corruption to dilreminate idleness, and the love of ruinous amusements, in the minds of the People.
The seclusion of the Equeitrian order from the pursuit of political emolument or honour, and the opportunities they had, by contracts and by farming the revenue, to improve their for- tunes in a different way, confirmed them in the habits of trade, and the attention to lucrative fiderations.
The city was gradually crowded with a popu- lace, who, tempted with the cheap or gratuitous difiribution of corn, by the frequency of public shews, by the consequence they enjoyed as mem- bers of the popular assemblies, or perhaps diflodg- from the country by the engrossers of land, and the preference which was given to the labour of slaves over that of freemen, flocked from the co- lonies and municipal towns to reside at Rome. There they were corrupted by idleness and indigence, and the order itself was continually debaSed by the frequent acceflion of emancipated slaves.
The
The Romans, who were become so jealous of A  their prerogative as citizens, had no other way of, disposing of a save, who had obtained his freedom, than by. placing him on the rolls of the People; and from this quarter accordingly the numbers of the People were chiefly recruited. The emanci- pated save took the name of his master, became a client, and a retainer of his family; and at funerals and other folemnities, where the pomp was diflin- guifhed by the number of attendants, made a part of the retinue. This class of men accordingly ceived continual additions, from the vanity or weakness of those who chore to change their slaves into dependent citizens; and numbers who had been conduced to Rome as captives, or who had been purchased in Asia or Greece, at a price portioned to the pleasurable arts they poffiefed, came an acceflion to that turbulent populace, who, in the quality of Roman citizens, tyrannized in their turn, over the mailers of the world, and wrecked on the conquerors of so many nations the evils which they themselves had so freely inflited on mankind  ."
"Citizens of this extraction could not for ages ar- rive at any places of trust, in which they could, by their personal defects, injure the commonwealth; but they increased, by their numbers and their vices, the weight of that dreg, which, in great and prosperous cities, ever finks, by the tendency of vice and mifcondut, to the lowest condition. They became a part of that faction who are ever actuated by envy to their superiors, by mercenary views, or by abject fear; who are ever ready to espouse the cause of any leader against the ftraints of public order; difopofed to vilify the more refpetable ranks of men; and by their difference on the subje of justice or honour,"
"  Velleius,    4."
"to"
"E o to frustrate every principle that may be employed"
"I. for the government of mankind, besides fear and - comn pulfion."
"Although citizens of this description were yet far from being the majority at Rome, yet it is bable that they were in numbers sufficient to taminate the whole body of the People; and, if enrolled promiicuoufly in all the tribes, might have had great weight in turning the scale of political councils. This effeet, however, was happily vented by the wife precaution which the Censors had taken to confine all citizens of mean or slavish extraction to four of the Tribes. These were called tle Tribes of the City, and formed but a small portion of the whole  ."
"Notwithstanding this precaution, we must sup- pose them to have been very improper parties in the participation of sovereignty, and likely enough to disturb the place of assembly with disorders and tumults."
"While the State was advancing to the fove- reignty of Italy, and while the territories fuccef- fively acquired were cleared for the reception of Rorman citizens, by the reduction and captivity of the natives, there was an outlet for the redundancy of this growing populace, and its overflowings were accordingly dispersed over Italy, from Rhegium to Aq-ileia, in about seventy colonies. But the coun- try being now completely fettled, and the property of its inhabitants elfablifhed, it was no longer pof- fible to provide for the indigent citizens in this manner; and the practice of fettling new colonies, hi ch had been so ulefli in planting, and securing ihe conqueris which were made in Italy, had not et en extended beyond this country, nor em-  ;-.- 12. I.  46  hen this precaut;on vas taken by Fali' .'.::: nr., the Tlibce amrJunlm- to thirty-one. See the fuccetivc aed:: ;  *- , ch tre :ibe wesre briough: up to rhis number,  :ib.  . 5 . : : i,   . i  .i.   . 1  it .   1 ."
"ployei!"
"ployed as the means of securing any of the A  vinces lately acquired. Mere colonization, indeed, i would have been an improper and inadequate mea- sure for this purpose; and in time of the republic never was, in any corifiderable degree, extended beyond sea. The provinces were placed under military government, and were to be retained in fubmiflion by bodies of regular troops. Roman citizens had little inclination to remove their habi- tations beyond the limits of Italy; and if they had, would have been unable, in the mere capacity of civil corporations and pacific settlements, to carry into execution the exations of a government which they themselves now become inhabitants and prietors of land in those provinces, would have soon been interelted to oppose: for there reasons, although the Roman territory was greatly extend-  the resources of the poorer citizens were dimi- nifhed. The former discharge for many dangerous humours that were found to arise among them, was in some measure shut up, and there humours began to regorge on the State."
"While the inferior people at Rome funk in their characters, or were debated by the circumstances we have mentioned, the superior ranks, by their application to affairs of State, by their education, by the ideas of high birth and family diftindcion, by the superiority of fortune, began to rife in their estimation, in their pretensions, and in their power; and they entertained some  gree of contempt for persons, whom the laws still required them to admit as their fellow-citizens and equals."
"In this disposition of parties so dangerous in a commonwealth, and amidst materials so likely to catch the flame, some sparks were thrown that ofon kindled up anew all the popular animofities which seemed to have been so long extinguished. We have been carried, in the preceding narration, by"
"the"
"B O the series of events, somewhat beyond the date of"
"tranfadions that come now to be related. While Scipio was employed in the siege of Numantia, and while the Roman officers in Sicily were yet unable to reduce the revolted slaves, Tiberius Gracchus, born of a Plebeian family, but enno- bled by the honours of his father, by his descent on the of his mother from the firit Scipio Afri- canus, and by his alliance with the second Scipio, who had married his sifter, being now Tribune of the People, and poffeifed of all the accomplifll ments required in a popular leader, great ardour, resolution, and eloquence, formed a projeE in it- self extremely alarming, and in its consequences dangerous to the peace of the republic."
"Like other young men of high pretensions at Rome, Tiberius Gracchus had begun his military service at the usual age, had served with reputation under his brother-in-law, Scipio, at the siege of Carthage, afterwards as Questor, under Mancinus in Spain, where the credit of his father, well known in that province, pointed him out to the natives as the only person with whom they would negociate in the treaty that ensued. The disgrace he incur- red in this tranfaition, gave him a diftafle to the militarv service, and to foreign affairs. When he was called to account for it, the severity he expe- rienced from the Senate, and the protecion he ob- tained from the People, filled his breast with an animr.fity to the one, and a prepossession in favour of the other  ."
"Actuated by these dispositions, or by an idea not uncommon to enlhufiaftic minds, that the fq:!al djlribution of property, so favourable to the -  is an iyjury to the poor; he now proposed in part to remedy or to mitigate this supposed evil, by reviving the celebrated law of Licinius, by"
"  Cicero Claris Oratoribus,  Z7."
"which"
"which Roman citizens had been restrained from A  accumulating estates in land above the value of . five hundred jugera  , or from having more than ~' one hundred of the larger cattle, and five hundred of the lesser."
"In his travels through Italy, he said, he had ob- served that the property of land was beginning to be engrossed by a few of the nobles, and that the country was entirely occupied by slaves to the ex- clufion of freemen: that the race of Roman citi- zens would Coon be extinAt  , if proper fettle- ments were not provided to enable the poor to support their families, and to educate their chil- dren; and he alleged, that if estates in land were reduced to the measure prescribed by law, the surplus left would then be sufficient for this purpose."
"Being determined, however, as much as pofli- ble, to prevent the opposition of the Nobles, and to reconcile the interest of both parties to his scheme, he proposed to make some abatements in the rigour of the Licinian law, allowing every fa- mily, holding five hundred jugera in right of the father, to hold half as much in the right of every unemancipated son; and proposed, that every person who should susser any diminution of his property in consequence of the intended reform, should have compensation made to him; and that the fum necessary for this purpose should be issued from the treasury."
"In this manner he set out with an appearance of moderation, acting in concert with tome leading men in the State and members of the Senate, such as Appius Claudius, whose daughter he had mar- ried, a Senator of the family of Crassus, who was then at the head of the priesthood, and Mutius Scaevola, the Consul."
"  Little more than half as many acres.   Plutarch in Tib. Graceh."
"To"
"B To complete the intended reformation, and to"
"prevent for the future the accumulation of eflates in land, the sale or commerce of land was from thenceforward to be prohibited; and three corn- miflioners were to be annually named, to en- sure the execution and regular observance of this law."
"This projec, however plausible, it is probable, was extremely unseasonable, and ill' suited to the fiate of the commonwealth. The law of Licinius had paiTed in the year of Rome three hundred and feventy-feven, no more than fourteen years after the city was restored from its deftru by the Gauls, and about two hundred and fifty years fore this date; and though properly suited to a small republic, and even necessary to preserve a democracy, was, in that condition of the People, received with difficulty, and was oion trespassed upon even by the person himfelfon whose fuggef- it had been moved and obtained: that it was become obsolete, and gone into disuse, appeared from the abuses which were now complained of, and to which its renewal was propafed as a medy. It was become in a great measure imprac- ticable, and even dangerous in the present slate of the republic. The dillintions of poor and rich are as neceftary in States of considerable extent, as  bour and good government. The poor are def- tined to labour, and the rich, by the advantages of education, independence, and leisure, are qua- lified for superior fiations. The empire was now greatly extended, and owed its safety and the or- der of its government to a respeCtable aristocracy, founded on the possession of fortune, as well as personal qualities and public honours. The rich were not, without some violent convulsion, to be itript of eflates which they themselves had bought, or which they had inherited from their anceflors. The poor were not qualified at once to be railed"
"to"
"to a itate of equality with persons inured to a betterec A  condition. The project seemed to be as ruinous to  government as it was to the security of property, and tended to place the members of the common- wealth, by one rash and precipitate siep, in situ- ations in. which they were not at all qualified to as. .For ihefe reasons, as well, as from motives of private interest affeEting the majority of the nobles, the project of Tiberius was firenuoufly opposed by the Senate; and from motives of envy, interest, or miflaken zeal forjuffice, as warmly supported by the opposite party. At the several assemblies of the People which were called to deliberate on this subjea, Tiberius, exalting the characters of freemen contrasted with slaves, displayed the copi- ous and' pathetic eloquence in which he excelled. All the free inhabitants, of Italy were Romans, or nearly allied to this people. He, observed liow much, being supplanted by the slaves of the rich, they were diminished in their numbers. He veighed again the practice of employing slaves, a class of men that bring perpetual danger, without any addition of strength to the public, and who are ever ready to break forth in desperate infurreEtions, as they had then actually done in Sicily, where they itill occupied the Roman arms in a tedious and ruinous war  . In declaiming on the mortifications and hard- Ihips. of the indigent citizen, he had recourle to the arguments commonly advanced to explode the equalities of mankind.  Every wild beast, he said, -. in this happy land has a cover or place of ' retreat. But many valiant and refpedCable.citi- zens, who have exposed their lives, and who  have shed their blood in the service of their  country, have not a home to which they may 4  Appian. Bell. Cir.
 tire."
"B tire. They wander with their wives and their
1.  children, itript of every possession, but that of the --  air and the light. To such men the common"
"military exhortation, to fight for the tombs of their fathers, and for the altars of their houfeholdgods, is a mockery and a lie. They have no altars; they have no monuments. They fight and they"
"die to augment the estates, and to pamper the luxury of a few wealthy citizens, who have en-  grossed all the riches of the commonwealth: As  citizens of Rome, they are intitled the flers of  the world, but possess not a foot of earth on which they may reft  ."
"He asked,  whether it were not' reasonable to apply what was public to public uses ? whether a freeman were not preferable to a slave, a brave man to a coward, and a fellow-citizen to a firan-  ger ? He expatiated on the fortune, and stated the future prolpets of the republic. Much, he said,  she had acquired, and had yet more to  acquire: that the People, by their decision in the present question were to determine, whether  they were, by multiplying their numbers, to en-  crease their firength, and be in a condition to  quer what yet remained of the world ? or, by  suffering the resources of the whole People to get  into the hands of a few, they were to permit  their numbers to decline, and to become unable,  against nations envious and jealous of their pow-  er, even to maintain the ground they already had gained?"
" He exhorted the present proprietors of land,  whom the law of division might asseA, not to  withhold, for the fake of a trifling interefi to themselves, lo great an advantage from their  country. He bade them confider whether they  would not, by the secure possession of five hun-"
"  Pi:arnh, Ia Vit. Tib. Gracch."
" dred
 dred jugera, and of half as much to each ofC A  their children, be fuffciently rewarded for the.
conceftions now required in behalf of the pub-  lic; put them in in ind that riches were merely coniparativd and that, in refpec to this advan- tage, they were fiill to remain in the firfti ank of ' their fellow-citizens (?'. By these and similar argurmierts he endeavoured to obtain the consent of one party, and to inflame the zeal of the other. But when he cane to pose, that the law Should be read, he found tlat his opponents had availed therhfelves of their usual defence; had procured  Otavius, one of his own colleagues, to interpose with his negative, and to forbid any farther proceeding in the business. Here, according to the forms of the constitution, this matter fh6uld have dropped. The Tribunes were instituted to defend their own party, riot tof attack their opponents and to prevent, not to promote innovations. Every single Tribune had a negative on the whole. But Tiberius, thus fud- denly flopped in his career, became the more im- petuous and confirmed in his purpose. Having adjourned the alfembly to another days he pared a motion more violent than the forrer, iri which he erased all the clauses by which he had en- deavoured to soften the hardships likely to fall on the rich. He proposed, that, without expecting any compensation, they should absolutely cede the surplus of their possessions, as being obtained by fraud and injufeice. In this time of fufpence, the controversy began to divide the colonies and free cities of Italy, and was Warmly agitated wherever the citizens had ex- tended their property. The rich and the poor took opposite fides. They colleted their argu,, ments, and they mustered their strength. The first
(i) Appian. Bell. Civ,  1. ,had o had recourse to the topics which are commonly em.
- ployed on the of prescription, urging that,  'in some cafes, they had possessed their estates from
time immemorial; and that the lands they possessed were become valuable, only in consequence of the industry and labour which they themselves had em- ployed to improve them; that, in other cafes, they had actually bought their estates: that the public faith, under which they were suffered to purchase, was now engaged to proteEt and secure their pof- session: that, in reliance on this faith, they had ereted, on these lands, the sepulchres of their fathers; they had pledged them for the dowries of their wives and the portions of their children, and mortgaged them as security for the debts they had contracted: that a law regulating or limiting the farther encreafe or accumulation of property might be suffered; but that a law, having a retrofpet, and operating in violation of the rights, and to the ruin of so many families, was altogether unjust, .and even impracticable in the execution. -The poor, on the contrary, pleaded their own indigence and their merits; urged that they were no longer in a capacity to fill the flatiori of Roman citizens or of freemennor in a condition to fettle fa- milies or to rear children, the future hopes of the commonwealth: that no private person could plead immemorial poffeflion of lands which had been acquired for the public. They enumerated tli wars which they themselves, or their anceflors, had maintained in the conquest of those lands. They concluded, that every citizen was entitled to his {hare of the public conquefis; and that the argu- ments which were urged to support the polfeflions of the nobles, only tended to shew how prefump- tuous and insolent such usurpations, if suffered to remain, were likely to become.
This mode of reasoning appears plausible; but it is dangerous to adopt by halves even reason it,
- . self
self. If it were reasonable that eer Rdman citi A  zen should have an equal share ofthe conquered I lands, it' ws still more reaf6nable; that tlie. origi- nal proprietors, from whom those lands had been unjufily taken, should have them restored. If, in this, the maxims of reason and juflice had been observed, Rome would have iiill been. a. fmll community, and might have ated with safety on the principles of equality which are suited to a small republic. But the Romaris, becoming so- vereigns of a great and extensive territory, muff adopt the disparities, and submit to the fubordina- tions, which mankind universally have found na- tural, and even necessary, to their government in such situations."
"Multitudes of people from all parts of Italy; some earnestly desirous to have the law enated, others to have. it set aside, crowded to. Rome to attend the decifioh of the question; and Gracchus, without dropping his intention, as usual, upon the negative of his colleague, only bethought himself how he might surmount, or remove this obftruc-  Having hitherto lived in personal intimacy with Otavius, he tried to gain him in private; and having failed in this attempt, he entered into ex- 'pofhulations with him, in pretence of the public as- fembly; desired to know, whether he feared to have his own estate impaired by the effeas of the law; for, if so, he offered to indemnify him fully in whatever he might susser by the execution of it: and being fill unable to.lhake his colleague, who was supported by the countenance of the Senate and the higher ranks of men in the State, he  termined to try the force of his Triburiitian pow- ers to compel him, laid the State itself under a ge- neralinterdi&, fealed up the doors of the. treasury, suspended the proceedings in the courts of the Pra-"
"X 2 tors."
"B oK tors, and put a stop to all the functions of office ia"
"_ the city."
"All the nobility and superior class of the People went into mourning. Tiberius, in his turn, en- deavoured to alarm the passions of his party; and believing, or pretending to believe, that he him- seif was in danger of being assassinated, had a number of persons with arms to defend his person."
"While the city was in this state of fufpence and confusion, the Tribes were again assembled, and Tiberius, in defiance of the. negative of his col- league, was proceeding to call the votes, when many of the People, alarmed by this intended violation of the sacred law, crowded in before the Tribe that was moving to ballot, and seized the urns. A great tumult was likely to arise. The popular party, being most numerous, were crowd- around their leader, when two Senators, Man- lius and Fulvius, both of consular dignity, fell at his feet, embraced his knees, and beseeched him not to proceed. Overcome with the refpet that was due to persons of this rank, and with the sense of some impending calamity, he alked, What they would have him to do?  The cafe, they said,  is too arduous for us to decide; refer it to the Se- nate, and await their decree."
"Proceedings were accordingly suspended until the Senate had met, and declared a resolution not to confirm the law. Gracchus resumed the sub- jeCt with the People, being determined either to remove, or to flight the negative of his colleague. He proposed, that either the refractory Tribune, or himself, should be immediately fiript of his dignity. He desired that Octavius should put the queftlon first, Whether Tiberius Gracchus should be degraded ? This being declined as irregular and vain, he declared his intention to move in the as- fembly, on the following day, That Oatavius hould be divested of the character of Tribune."
"Hitherto"
"Hitherto all parties had proceeded agreeably toc A  the laws and conltitution of the commonwealth.;  but this motion, to degrade a Tribune, by what- ever authority, was equally subversive of both. The person and dignity of Tribunes, in order that they might be secure from violence, whether of- sered by any private person, public magifirate, or even by the People themselves, were guarded by the most sacred vows. Their persons, therefore, during the continuance of their office, were sacred; so long their character was indelible, and, without their own consent, they' could not be removed by any power whatever."
"The assembly, however, being met in confe- quence of this alarming adjournment, Tiberius newed his prayer to avius to withdraw his ne- gative; but not prevailing in this request, the Tribes were direted to proceed. The votes of seventeen were already given to degrade. In taking those of the eighteenth, which would have made a majo- rity, the Tribunes made a pause, while Tiberius embraced his colleague, and, with a voice to be heard by the multitude of the People, beseeched him to spare himself the indignity, and others the regret, of so revere, though necessary, a measure. Of&avius shook: but, observing the Senators who were present, recovered his resolution, and bid Tiberius proceed as he thought proper. The votes of the majority were accordingly declared, and 06Oavius, reduced to a private fiation, was drag- ged from the Tribunes bench, and exposed to the rage of the populace. Attempts were made on his life, and a faithful slave, that endeavoured to save him, was dangerously wounded; but a num- ber of the more refpeetable citizens interposed, and Tiberius himself was active in favouring his es- cape."
"This obstacle being removed, the at so long Let Sem depending, for making a more equal division of proana."
"lands,"
"o lands, was passed; and three commiflioners, Tibe- i. rius Gracchus, Appius Claudius, his father-in-law, -- - and his brother, Caius Gracchus, then a youth"
"'serving under Publius Scipio at the siege of Nu- mantia, were named to carry the law into execu- "
"This at, as it concerned the interest of almost every inhabitant of Italy, immediately raised a great ferment in every part of the country. Per- fonsholding'confiderable estates in land were alarm- for their property. The poor were elated with the hopes of becoming fdddenly rich. If there was a middling class not to be greatly affected in their own situation, they still trembled for the effects of a contest between such parties. The Senate en, deavoured to delay the execution of the law, with- held the usual aids and appointments given to the commiltioners of the People in the ordinary admi- niftratiori of public trusts, and waited for a fit op- portunity to suppress entirely this hazardous projet. Parties looked on each other with a gloomy and fufpiclous silence. A person who had been aAive in procuring the Agrarian Law, having died in this critical jundure, his death was'alleged to be the etfect of poison administered by the opposite party. Numbers of the people, to countenance a report to this purpose, went into mourning; even Gracchus, affecting to believe a like design to be forming against himself, appeared, with his children and their mother, as suppliants in the streets, and implored the protection of the People. Still more to interest their passions in his safety, he published a lift of the ats which he then had in view, all tending to gratify the People, or to mortify the Se- nate. Attalus, king of Pergamus, having, about this time, bequeathed his dominions and his trea- sure to the Romans, Gracchus procured an aft to transfer the adminifiration of this inheritance from the Senate to the People; and to difribute tbe"
"money"
"money found in the treasury of Pergamus to the A  poorer citizens, the better to enable them to culti- If vate and to flock the lands which were now to be~ given them. He obtained another aft to circum- scribe the power of the Senate, by joining the Equestrian order with the Senators in the nomina- to juries, or in forming the occasional tribu- nals of jultice. These, with the preceding attempts to abolish or to weaken the ariltocratical part of the-govern- ment, were jufly alarming to every person who was anxious for the preservation of the State. As the policy of this Tribune tended to fubilitute po- pular tumults for fober councils and a regular ma- giftracy, it gave an immediate profpea of anarchy, which threatened to produce some violent ufurpa-  The sacred office which he so much abused, had served, on occasions, to check the caprice of the People, as well as to restrain the abuse of the executive power. The late violation it had sus- sered, was likely to render it entirely unfit for the first of these purposes, and to make the Tribune an infirument to execute the momentary will of the People, or to make the continuance of his trust  pend upon his willingness to serve this purpose. Tiberius heard himself arraigned in the Forum, and in every public assembly, for the violation of the sacred law. If any of your colleagues, said Titus Annius (whom he prosecuted for a speech in the Senate),  should interpose in my behalf, would  you have him also degraded ?
The people in general began to be sensible of the enormity they themselves had committed, and Tiberius found himself under a neceflity of plead- for the measure he had taken, after it had been carried into execution. The person of the Tribune, he observed, was sacred; because it was confe- crated by the People, whom the Tribunes repre- lented: but if the Tribune, inconfifient with his
character, o character, mhould injure where he was appointed to
_.. protet, should weaken a claim he was appointed
to enforce, and withhold from the People that right of decision which he was appointed to guard, the Tribune, not the People, was to blame for the consequences.
 Other crimes, he said,  may be enormous,  yet may not destroy the essence of the Tribuni.  tian characer. An attempt to demolish the Ca-  pitol, or to bum the fleets of the republic, ' might excite an universal and just indignation,  without rendering the person of the Tribune  who should be accused of them leTs sacred. But  an attempt to take away the power by which  his own office fubfifls, and which is centered in  himself only for the better exertion of that pow- er, is a voluntary and criminal abdication of  the trulL What is the Tribune but the officer  Of the People ? Strange! that this officer may, :' by virtue of authority derived from the People,  drag even the Consul himself to prison, and yet  that the People themselves cannot depose their  own officer, when he is about to annul the au-  thority by which he himself is appointed."
" Was ever authority more sacred than that of  king? It involved in itself the prerogativesof  every magistrate, and was likewise consecrated ' by holding the priefihood of the immortal gods.  Yet did not the people banish Tarquin? and thus, for the offence of one man, abolish the ' primitive government, under the auspices of  which the foundations of this city were laid.
 What more sacred at Rome than the persons of the Vestal Virgins, who have the custody of ' the holy fire Yet are they not for flight of- ; fences Sometimes buried alive ? Impiety to the gods being supposed to cancel a title which ' verence to the gods had conferred, must not"
"D injuries"
"5. injuries to the People suppress an authority whichc A  . a regard to the People has constituted ? i
 That person must fall, who himself removes a the base on which he is supported. A majority . of the Tribes creates a Tribune: Cannot the  whole depose? What more sacred than the things which are dedicated at the shrines of the (' immortal gods ? yet these the People may em-  ploy or remove at plealiure. Why not transfer the Tribunate, as a consecrated title, from one  person to another ? May not the whole People,"
"b' by their sovereign authority, do what every  person in this sacred office is permitted to do,  when he resigns or abdicates his power by a 'simple expression of his will. These specious arguments tended to introduce the plea of necessity where there was no founda- for it, and to set the sovereign power, in every .species of government, loose from the rules which itfelfhad enaded. Such arguments accordingly had no effect where the interest of the parties did not concur to enforce them. Tiberius saw his credit on the decline. He was publicly menaced with impeachment, and had given sufficient vocation to make him apprehend that, upon the expiration of his office, some violence might be of- sered to himfelf . His person was guarded only by the sacred charater of the Tribune. The firit Itep he should make in the new charater he was to assume, as commissioner for the division of lands, was likely to terminate his life. He resolved, if poflible, to take shelter in the Tribunate another year, and to procure this favour from the People, gave farther expectations of popular afts of one to shorten the term of military service, and of another to grant an appeal to the People from the courts of juflice lately established.
)? Orofius,    8.
The o The Senate, and every citizen who professed a _~ regard to the constitution, were alarmed. This
attempt, they said, to perpetuate the Tribunitian power in the fame perion, tends direatly to ty- ranny. The us irper, wth the lawless multitude that supports him, must soon expel from the pub- lic assemblies every citizen who is inclined to mo- deratirn; and together with the property of our lands, to which they already aspire, make them- selves master of the State. Their leader, it seems, like every other tyrant, already thinks that his safety depends upon the continuance of his power.
In tiis feverish state of furpence and anxiety, areat efforts were made to determine the ele&ions. The time of choofing the Tribunes was now fast approaching: Roman citizens, dispersed on their lands throughout Italy, were engaged in the har- vest, and could not repair to the city. On the day of election the assembly was ill attended, efpe-. ciallv by those who were likely to favour Tiberius. He being rejeAed by the firit Tribes that moved to the ballot, his friends endeavoured to amuse the - assembly with forms, and to protrat the debates, till observing that the field did not fill, nor the ap- pearance change for the better, they moved to  journ to the following day.
In this recess Tiberius put on mourning, went forth to the streets with his children, and, in half of hapless infants, that might already be fidered as orphans, on the eve of losing their pa- rent in the cause of freedom, implored the teEtion of the People; gave out that the party of the rich, to hinder his being re-eleted, had deter- mined to force their way into his house in the night, and to murder him. Numbers were affected by these difrral representations: a multitude crowded to his doors, and watched all night in the fireets.
On the arrival of morning and the approach of the assembly, the declining appearance of his as-
fairs
fairs suggested presages; and the fuperfiition ofc A  the times has furnished hiflory with the omens, by . which himself and his friends were greatly dismay- -~  He, nevertheless, with a crowd of his parti- zans, took his way to the Capitol, where the Peo- pie had been appointed to assemble. His attend- ants multiplied, and numbers from the assembly descended the steps to meet him. ' Upon his en- try a (hout was raised, and his party appeared sufficiently firong, if not to prevail in their choice, perhaps by their violence to deter every citizen of a different mind from attending the eledtion."
"A chosen body took post round the person of Tiberius, with dire to susser no firanger to approach him. A signal was agreed upon, in cafe it were necessary to employ force. Mean time the Senators, on their part, were haflily assembled in tlie Temple of Faith, in anxious deliberations on the measures to be followed."
"When the firfl tribe delivered their votes, a fulion arose among the People. Numbers from the more diflant parts of the assembly began to press forward to the centre. Among others, Ful- vius Flaccus, a Senator yet attached to Tiberius, being too far off to be heard, beckoned with his hand that he would speak with the Tribunes. Having made his way through the multitude, he informed Tiberius, that a resolution was taken in the Senate to refill him by force; and that a party of Senators, with their clients and slaves, was arm- againit his life. All who were near enough to hear this information, took the alarm, snatched the fiaves fromn the officers that attended the Tribunes, and tucked up their robes as for immediate vio- lence. The alarm spread through the assembly, and, many called out to know the cause, but no diftind accounts could be heard. Tiberius, hav- in vin iattempted to :speak, mlad a sign, by"
"waving"
"o waving his hand round his head, that his life was - in danger. This sign, together with the hotlile
and menacing appearances that gave rife to it, infiantly reported in the Senate, and inter- preted as a hint given to the People, that it was necessary he should be crowned, or that he should assume the sovereignty, the Senate immediately re. solved, in a form that was usual on alarming occa- sions, that the Consul should provide for the safety of the State. This resolution was supposed to ser a dictatorial power, and was generally given when immediate execution or summary proceed- ings were deemed to be necessary, without even sufficient time for the formalities observed in naming a Diaator. The Consul Mucius Scevola, who had been in concert with Tiberius in drawing up the first frame of his law, but who probably had left him in the extremes to which he afterwards proceeded; on the present occasion, however,  clined to employ force against a Tribune of the People, or to disturb the Tribes in the midst of their legal assembly. i' If they (hall come, he said,  to any violent or illegal determination, I will employ the whole force of my authority to prevent its effects."
"In this expreflion of the Consul there did not appear to the audience a proper disposition for the present occasion. The laws were violated: A  fperate party was prepared for any extremes: All fober citizens, and even many of the Tribunes, had fled from the tumult: The priests of Jupiter had (hut the gates of their temple: The laws, it was said, ought to govern; but the laws cannot be pleaded by those who have set them aside, and they are no longer of any avail, unless they are reitored by some exertion of vigour, fit to coun- terad the violence that has been offered to them.  The Consul, said Scipio Nafica,  deserts the  republic; let those who wilh to preserve it, fol-"
". low"
" low me. The Senators instantly arose, andc A  moving in a body, which encreafed as they went, . by the concourse of their clients, they seized the ^ shafts of the fasces, or tore up the benches in their way, and, with their robes wound up, in place of shields, on their left arm, broke into the midst of the assembly of the People.
Tiberius, surrounded by a numerous multitude, found his party unable to resist the awe with which they were firuck by the pretence of the Senate and Nobles. The few who refifled were beat to the ground. He himself, while he fled, being seized by the robe, flipped it from his shoulders and tinued to fly; but he fiumbled in the crowd, and, while he attempted to recover himself, was slain with repeated blows. His body, as being that of a tyrant, together with the killed of his party, amounting to about three hundred, as accomplices in a treasonable design againfi the republic, were denied the honours of burial, and thrown into the river. Some of the most ative of his partisans that escaped, were afterwards cited to appear, and were outlawed or condemned.
Thus, in the heats of this unhappy dispute, both the Senate and the People had been carried to aas of violence that insulted the laws and constitution of their country. This constitution was by no means too ftrit and formal to contend with such evils; for, betides admitting a general latitude of conduct scarcely known under any other political establishment, it had provided expedients or great and dangerous occasions, which were sufficient to extricate the commonwealth from greater extremi- ties than those to which it had been reduced in the course of this unfortunate contell.
The People, when refirained from their obje& by the negative of one of their Tribunes, had only to wait for the expiration of his office, when, by a new election, they might so model the college as
to o sto be secure of its unanimous consent in the parti,
cular measures to which they were then inclined. The precipitant violation of the sacred law, a cedent which, if followed, mull have rendered the Tribunes mere instruments of popular violence, not bars to reitrain oppreflion, filled the minds of the People with remorse and horror, and gave to the Senate and Nobles a dreadful apprehension of what they were to expect from a party capable of such a profane and violent extreme.
The policy of Tiberius Gracchus on the other hand, the laws he had obtained, his oWn re-elec, to secure the execution, and the sequel of his plan, seered to threaten the republic with diftrac- and anarchy, likely to end in his own ufurpa-  or in that of some more artful demagogue. But even under these gloomy expeEtations, the Se- nate could, by naming a Ditator5 or by the mission which they actually gave to the Consul, have recourse to a legal preventive, and might have repelled the impending evil by measures equally decisive and powerful, though more legal than those they employed. But the Consul, it seems, was fufpeEed of connivance with the oppo- site party, had received his own commission coldly, and could not be entrufled with the choice of a Dic- tator.
In these extremities, the violent resolution that was taken by the Senate appears to have been ne- ceffary; and probably for the present saved the public; preserved it indeed, not in a found, but in a sickly slate, and in a fever, which, with some intermifflons, at every return of similar disorderss threatened it with the dissolution and ruin of its whole constitution.
The disorders that arise in free States which are beginning to corrupt, generally furnish very diffi- cult questions in the casuistry of politicians. Even the struggles of virtuous citizens, because they do
not
not prevent, are sometimes supposed to haften, the Hi A. ruin of their country. The violence of the Senate, . on this occasion, was by many confidered with aversion and horror. The subversion of govern- ment, that was likely to have followed the policy of Gracchus, because it did not take place, was overlooked; and the restitution of order, effee by the Senate, appeared to be a tyranny establish- in blood. The Senators themselves were firuck with some degree of remorse, and, what is-danger- ous in politics, took a middle course between the .extremes. They were cautious not to inflame ani- -mofities, by any immoderate use of their:late vic- .tory, nor by any immediate'oppofition to the exe- cution of the popular law. They wifhed'to atone for the violences lately committed againft:the per- son. of its author; they permitted Fulvius Flaccus and Papirius Carbo, two of the most daring lead- ers of the popular faction, to be elected commiffi- -oners for -the execution of the Agrarian law, in *the room of Tiberius and Appius Claudius, of .whom the latter also died about this time; and,.in order to stifle animofities and resentments, consent- that, under.pretence of an embassy to Perga- ,mus, Scipio Nafica should be removed from Rome. :In consequence of this commiflion, this illustrious citizen, the lineal descendant of one of the Scipios who perished in Spain in the time of the second Punic war, himself an ornament to the republic, .died in a species of exile, though under an honour- -able.title."
"In the midst of such agitations, foreign affairs were likely to be much overlooked. They ceeded, however, under the conduct of the officers to whom they were entrusted, with the usual -fuc- cess; and the Senate, having the reports made nearly about the fame time, of the pacification of Lusitania, the deftrution of Numantia, and the reduction and punishment of the slaves in Sicily,"
"named"
"oo- named commifiioners to at in conjunction with aI the generals commanding in those several services,"
"in order to fettle their provinces."
"Brutus and Scipio had their several triumphs; one with the title of Galaicus, for having duced the Gallicians; the other, fill preferring the title of Africanus to that of Numantinus, which was offered to him for the sack of Nu- manfia."
"The arrival of this refpeEtable citizen was anxi- oufly looked for by all parties, more to know what judgment he might pass on the late operations at Rome, than on account of the triumph he obtain- over enemies once formidable to his country, He was the near relation of Gracchus, and might, under pretence of revenging the death of that  magogue, have put himself at the head of a formid- able party. He was himself personally refpedted and beloved by numbers of the citizens, who had carried arms under his command, who were recent- ly arrived in Italy crowned with victory, and who might possibly, under pretence of vindicating the rights of the People, employ their arms againfi the republic. But the time of such criminal views on the commonwealth was not yet arrived. Scipio already, upon hearing the fate of Gracchus, had expreffed,.in some words that escaped him, his ap- probation of the Senate condut.  So may  every person peri  he said,  who shall dare  to commit such crimes (1). Soon after his arri- val from Spain, Papirius Carbo, the Tribune, call- upon him aloud, in the assembly of the People, to declare what he thought of the death of Grac- chus.  I must think, he said,  that if Grac-  chus meant to overturn the government of his  country, his death was fully merited. This  claration the multitude interrupted with murmurs"
"(I) Plnurch, io Vit. Tiberi Gracchi."
"of"
"of aversion and rage. Upon which Scipio raising A  his tone, expressed the contempt under which it 1'. seems that the populace of Rome had already ~ fallen.  I have been accustomed, he said,  to  the shout of warlike enemies, and cannot be as-  feEted by your dastardly cries. Then alluding to the number of enfranchised slaves that were en- rolled with the Tribes of the city, upon a second cry of displeasure, he continued,  Peace, ye  aliens and flep-children of Italy (i). You are  now free, but many of you I have brought to this place in fetters, and fold at the halbert for  slaves. Some were abashed by the truth, and all by the boldness of this contemptuous reproach, and shewed that popular aifemblies, though vested with supreme authority, may be sometimes insulted, as well as courted, with success. The part which Scipio took on this occasion was the more remarkable, that he himself was to be reckoned among the poorer citizens, and might have been a gainer by the rigorous execution of the Licinian law. His whole inheritance, according to Pliny, amounted to thirty-two pounds, or three hundred and twenty ounces of silver, which might be now valued at about two hundred and eighty pounds sterling. Papirius Carbo spent the year of his TribunateLexap;,i,. in fomenting the animosity of the People againfteabellara the Senate, and in promoting dangerous innova- tions. He obtained a law, by which the votes of the People, in questions of legislation as well as elecion  , and the opinions of the judges in  termining causes, were to be taken by ballot. He was less successful in the motion he made for a law to enable the fame person to be repeatedly chosen into the office of Tribune. He was support-"
"(1n) Velleius Paterculus,   . 4. () Cic. Legibas,  iii.  I. ed"
"Bo Ked in this motion by Caius Graechus; opposed by"
"'Scipio, Lxlius, and the whole authority of the Se,"
"nate  , who dreaded the perpetuating in any one person a power, which the sacredness of the charac- ter, and the attachment of the populace, rendered almost sovereign and irresistible."
"While the interests of party were exerted in these several questions at home, the State was laying the foundation of new quarrels abroad, and opening a scene of depredation and conquest in what was then the wealthiefi part of the known world. Soon after the death of Attalus, king of Pergamus, who had bequeathed his kingdom to the Romans, Ariftoni- cus, his natural brother, being the illegitimate son of Eumenes, made pretensions to the throne of Per- gamus, and was supported by a powerful party among the people. The Romans did not fail to maintain their right: Crassus, one of the Consuls of the preceding year, had been sent with an army Ai.  62z.into Asia for that purpose, but in his first encounter"
"with Ariftonicus was defeated and taken. He was afterwards killed while a captive in the hands of the enemy; having intentionally provoked one of his guards to lay violent hands on him, and thus ended a life which he thought was dishonoured by his preceding defeat."
"The following year, the Consul Perperna being sent on this service, and having, with better fortune than Crassus, defeated and taken Arii'onicus, got poflefiion of the treasure and kingdom of Attalus, but died in his command at Pergamus. From this time the Romans took a more particular concern than formerly in the affairs of Asia. They employ- Scipio Emilianus, with Sp. Mummius, and 1. Metellus, on a commiflion of observation to that country. We are told that the equipage of Scipio -upon this occasion confied of seven slaves; and"
"?i) Cic, Amicitil."
"this,"
"this, as a mark or charateriftic of the times, is per- A  haps more interesting than any thing else we could  be told of the embassy. The objec of the miflion appears to have related to Egypt as well as to Afia , though there was not any power in either that seemed to be in condition to alarm the Romans. Ptolemy Euergates had succeeded to the throne of Egypt, but was expelled by the peo- ple of Alexandria. Antiochus, king of Syria, had been recently engaged in a very unsuccessful war with the Parthians ; and it had not yet appeared how far it concerned the Romans to observe the king of Pontus, or to confider of the measures to be taken against him for the security of their pof- feflions in Asia. In whatever degree the Roman embassy found worthy objects of attention in the slate of the Asia- tic powers, matters were hastening in Italy to a fiate of great distraction and ferment, on account of the violence with which the Agrarian law was put in execution by Papirius Carbo, Fulvius Flac- cus, and Caius Gracchus, the commiflioners ap- pointed for this purpose. As the law authorised them to call upon all persons possessed of public lands to evacuate them, and submit to a legal di- vision; they, under this pretence, brought into quefiion all the rights of property throughout Italy, and took from one and gave to another as suited their pleasure; some suffered the diminution of their efrates with silent rage; others complained that they were violently removed from lands which they had cultivated, to barren and inhospitable situ- ations; even they who were supposed to be favour-  complained of the lots they received. Many were aggrieved, none were satisfied. Moved by the representations which were made of there abuses, Scipio, at his return from Asia,"
"  Valerius Maximus,    3."
"Y made"
"B o made an harangue in the Senate, by which lie"
"drew upon himlclF an invedtive from Fulvius, one of the commilioners. He did not propoue to peal the law, but that the execution of it should be taken out of the hands of so pernicious a sati- on, and committed to the Consul Sempronius Tu- ditanus, who remained in the administration of as- fairs in Italy, while his colleague Aquilius had gone to Asia to finiih the transaction in the conduct of which Perperna died."
"It is mentioned that Scipio, in this speech to the Senate, complained of insults and threats to his own person, which induced all the members, with a great body of the more refpetable citizens, to attend him in proceilion to his own house. Next morning he was found dead in his bed (q); and, notwithitanding the suspicions of violence tranf- mitted by different authors, nothing certain appears upon record; and no inquefi was ever made to discover the truth of there reports. This illufirious citizen, notwithstanding his services, had incurred so much the dilpieafure of the People, that he had not the honours' of a public funeral: If he had not died at this critical time, the Senate, it was sup- posed, meant to have named him DiCtator, for the purpose of purging the State of the evils with which it was now opprefred."
"The occasion, however, was not sufficient to make the Senate persist in their intention to name a Dic- tator; nor is there any thing material recorded as having happened during a few of the following years. QJintus Cacilius Metellus Macedonicus, and Qintus Pompeius, were Censors; both of Plebeian extraction; of which this is recorded as the first example. Metellus, at the Census, made a memorable speech, in which he recommended marriage, the eltabliihment of families, and the"
"(i) Cic. Am:citia."
"rearing"
"rearing of children. This speech being preserved, A  will recur to our notice again, being read by Au- _, guftus in the Senate, as a lesson equally applicable to the age in which he lived."
"The people who were fit to carry arims, as ap- peared at their enrolment, amounted to three hundred and seventeen thousand eight hundred and twenty-three. But what is moif memo- rable in the tranfafions of this muster, was the disgrace of Cains Attinius Labeo, who, being ftriick off the rolls of the Senate by Metellus, afterwards became Tribune of the People; and, by the difficulty with which the effet of his unjust revenge came to be prevented, showed the folly of making the will of any officer sacred, iworder to refrain the miflion of wrongs."
"Metellus, in returning fiom the cointry, about noon, while the market-place was thin of people, found himself suddenly apprehend- by this vindicive Tribune, and ordered to be thrown immediately from the Tarpeiari Rock. The People afllmbled iri crowds, were sensible of the Tribune breach of the sacred trust reposed in him; and, accofling Metellus by the name of Father, lamented his fate: but, unless another Tribune could be found to interpose in his favour, there was no other power in the commonwealth that could, with- out supposed profanation, interrupt a Tribune even in the commillion of a crime. Metel- lus struggled to obtain a delay, was overpow- ered and dragged through the streets-' while the violence he suffered made the blood to spring from his nostrils. A Tribune was with difficulty found in time to save his life; but Attinius having, with a lighted fire and other forms of consecration, devoted his estate to"
"'sacred"
"B o sacred uses, it is alleged that he never recovered"
"IIt."
"Such was the weak slate to which the go- vernment was reduced by the late popular en- croachments, that this outrageous abuse of power was never punished; and such the moderation of this great man family, that though he himself. lived fifteen years in high credit after this acci- dent, saw his family raised to the higherf digni- ties, and was carried to his grave by four sons, of whom one had been Censor, two had tri- umphed, three had been Consuls, and the fourth, then Prator, was candidate for the Consulate, which he obtained in the following year; yet no one of this powerful family chore to encreafe the disturbances of the commonwealth, by attempting to revenge the outrage which their father had sus- sered  . LteiAt. . Caius Attinius is mentioned as being the"
"person who obtained the admission of the Tri- bunes, in right of their office, as members of the Senate  ."
"The Consul Sempronius, though authorised by the Senate to restrain the violence of the mifioners who were employed in the execution of the Agrarian Law, declined that hazardous business, and chose rather to encounter the enemy in the province of Ifiria, where he made some quefis and obtained a triumph."
"In the fame turbulent times lived Pacuvius, the tragic poet, and Lucilius, inventor of the satire. The latter, if we suppose him to be the fame whose name is found in the lift of Qieftors, was a per-   Plin. lii.  44. Cicero, in pleading to have his honfe restored to him, though devoted to sacred ufc, ilates the form of consecration in te cafe of Metellnr, but denies the effect of it. Pro domo fua, 47. (,) Plin .   44   A. Ge.iu,   "
"'son"
"'son of rank, and moved in the line of political A  ferment."
"Hillorians mention a dreadful eruption of Mount ]Etna, the effect of subterraneous fires, which shaking the foundations of Sicily and the neigh- bouring islands, gave explosions of flame, not only from the crater of the mountain, but likewise from below the waters of the sea, and forced fud. den and great inundations over the islands of Li- pare and the neighbouring coasts,"
"CHAP,"
"C A  III. State of the Italian Allies, and the views which now"
"began to be conceived by them.-Appearance of Caius Gracchuts.-Reolutions to purge the City of Alieins.--Caiflate and factious Motions of Fulvius Flaccus.-Confpiracy of Frigelle fippreffed.-Cains Gracchus returns to Roime.-Offers himself Candi- date for the Tribunate.-Addrefs of Cornelia.-Tri- bunate and AcIs of Caius Gracchus.-Re-elel ion.- Proposal to admit the Inhabitants of Italy on the Rolls of Roman Citizens.-Popular Ails of Grac- chus and Livius.-lhe Senate begin to prevail.- Death of Caius Gracchus and Fulvius. K eruption of Mount Etna, and the other  _ . _ particulars relating to the natural history of"
"Italy, with the mention of which we concluded our last Chapter, were confidered as prodigies, and as the presages of evils which were yet to afflia the republic. At this time indeed the State of Italy seemed to have received the feeds of much trouble, and to contain ample materials of civil combullion.   67. The citizens, for whom no provision had been"
"made at their return from military service, or who thought themselves partially dealt with in the colo- nies, the leaders of tumult and facion in the city, were now taught to confider the land-property of Italy, as their joint inheritance. They were, in imagination, difiributing their lots, and feledting their Shares."
"In the mean time, the inhabitants of the Muni- cipia, or free towns, and their diftrits, who, not being citizens, served the State as allies, had rea- son to dread the rapacity of such needy and power-"
"ful"
"ful maiters. They themselves likewise began toc A  repine under the inequality of their condition. Il They observed, that while they were scarcely al- lowed to retain the poffeflions of their ancestors, Rome, aided by their arms, had gained that ex- tensive dominion, and obtained that territory, about which the poor and the rich were now likely to quarrel among themselves.  The Italian al-
lies, they said,  muff bleed in this contest, no  less than they had done in the foreign or more  distant wars of the commonwealth. They had been made, by the professions of Tiberius Grac- chus, to entertain hopes that every diftinAion in Italy would soon be removed, that every freeman in the country would be enrolled as a citizen of Rome, and be admitted to all the powers and tensions implied in that designation. The confi- deration of this fubjeEt, therefore, could not be long delayed; and the Roman Senate, already itruggling with attacks of their fellow citizens, had an immediate storm to apprehend from the al- lies."
"The revolutions of the State had been so fre- quent, and its progress from small beginnings to a great empire, had been so rapid, that the changes to which men are exposed, and the exertions of which they are capable, no where appear so fpicuous, or are Co diftindly marked."
"In the firit ages the political importance of a Roman citizen appears not to have been felt or un- derllood. Conquered enemies were removed to Rome, and their captivity confifled in being forced to be Romans, to which they submitted with great relucance. It is not to be doubted that every so- reigner was welcome to take his place as a Roman citizen in the assembly of the People; that many were admitted into the Senate (a), and some even (a) The Claudian family were aliens, and an alien from Tarquinii."
"on"
"B o on the throne  . It is likely alfb, that the firfl"
"colonies confidered themselves as detached from the city of Rome, and as forming cantons apart; for we find them, like the other States of Italy, occasionally at war with the Romans."
"But when the sovereignty of Italy came to be established at Rome, and was there actually exer- cifed by the collective body ot the People, the habitants of the colonies, it is probable, laid claim to their votes in elections, and presented themselves to be inrolled in the Tribes. They felt their sequence and their superiority over the' Municipia, or free towns in their neighbourhood, to whom, as a mark of distinction and an adt of munificence, some remains of independence had been left. Even in this state, the rolls of the People had been very negligently compiled, or preserved. The Kings, the Consuls, the Censors, who were the officers, in different agesof the State, entrufled with the muf- ters, admitted on the rolls such as presented them- selves, or such as they chose to receive. One ful invited all the free inhabitants of Latium to poll in the assemblies of the People; another rejeced them, and in time of ele&ions forbid them the city. But notwithitanding this prohibition, aliens that were brought to Rome on a foot of captivity, were suffered by degrees to mix with the citizens  . The inhabitants of the free towns, removing to Rome upon any creditable footing, found easy admission on the rolls of some tribe. The towns complained they were depopulated. The Romans endeavoured to shut the-gates of their city by peated fcrutinies, and the prohibition of furreptiti- ous enrolments: but in vain. The practice still continued, and the growing privilege, diflintion, and eminence of a Roman citizen made that title (&) Tarquinins Prifcus was of Creek extration.   This happened particularly in the cafe of the Campanians."
"become"
"become the great objet of individuals, and of en A  tire cantons. It had already been beflowed upon difiriAs whose inhabitants were not distinguished by any lingular merit with the Roman State. In this refpea all the allies were nearly equal; they had regularly composed at leaf one half in every Roman army, and had borne an equal lhare in.all the dangers and troubles of the commonwealth; and, from having valued themselves of old on their separate titles and national diftinftions, they began now to aspire to a Ihare in the sovereignty of the empire, and wished to fink for ever their provincial designations under the general title of Romans."
"Not only the great power that was enjoyed in the assembly of the People, and the serious privileges that were bestowed by the Porcian law, but even the title of citizen in Italy, of legionary soldier in the field, and the permission of wearing the Roman gown, were now ardently coveted as marks of dig- nity and honour. The city was frequented by persons who hoped separately to be admitted in the Tribes, and by numbers who crowded from the neighbouring cantons, on every remarkable day of assembly, still flattering themselves, that the expec- tations which Gracchus had raised on this important subjet might soon be fulfilled."
"In this Itate of affairs, the Senate authorized Ju   627-"
". Consuls-  nius Pennus, one of the Tribunes, to move theEm'iliusL- People for an edit to prohibit, on days of eledi-idus,  oa or public assembly, this concourse of aliens, orue. and requiring all the country towns in Italy to lay claim to their denizens, who had left their own corporations to act the part of citizens at Rome."
"On this occasion, Caius Gracchus, the brother of the late unfortunate Tribune, flood forth, and made one of the first appearances, in which he fhbwed the extent of his talents, as well as the party he"
"was"
"B o :was likely to espouse in the commonwealth. This"
"u. young man, being about twenty years of age when
the troubles raised by his elder brother had so much difiurbed the republic, and when they ended so fatally for himself, had retired upon that cataf- trophe from the public view, and made it uncertain whether the fate of Tiberius might not deter him, not only from embracing like dangerous counsels, but even from entering at all on the line of political affairs. His retirement, however, he spent in such iiudies as were then come into repute, on account of their importance, as a preparation for the bufi- ness of the courts of justice, of the Senate, and of the popular assemblies; and the first appearance he made gave evidence of the talents he had acquired for these several departments. His parts seemed to be quicker, and his spirit more ardent, than that of his elder brother; and the people conceived hopes of having their pretensions revived, and more fuc- cefsfully conduced, than under their former leader. The cause of the country towns, in which he now engaged, was specious, and tended to form a new, a numerous, and a formidable party in Italy, likely to join in every factious attempt which might throw the public into disorder, and make way for the mifcuous admission of aliens on the rolls of the Peo- ple. This cause, however, was fraught with so much confusion to the State, and tended so much to lessen the political consequence of those who were already citizens, that the argument in favour of the resolution to purge the city of aliens prevailed, ared an adt to that purpose accordingly was paifed   in the assembly of the People.
It deserves to be recorded, that amidst the quiries set on foot in consequence of this edid, or about this time, Perperna, the father of a late   Sextns Porpeinus Fef'us in voc Republica. Cicero in Bruto ia Of- Eciis  iii.
Consul,
Consul  , was claimed by one of the Italian cor A  porations, and found not to have been a citizen of . Rome. His son, whom we have already menti - oned, having vanquished -and taken Ariftonicus, the pretended heir of Attalus, died in his mand at Pergamus; and he is accordingly said to have been a rare example of the caprice of fortune, in having been a Roman Consul, though not a Ro- man citizen. This example may confirm what has been observed of the latitude which officers took in condueting the Census."
"The fires of sedition which had sometime preyedu.  6es. on the commonwealth were likely to break outM. Ph,- with encreafing force upon the promotion of Ful  Fulius vius Flaccus to the dignity of first magifirate.Fla'cu'- This faEtious citizen had blown up the flame with Tiberius Gracchus, and having succeeded him in the commiflion for executing the Agrarian law, never failed to carry the torch wherever matter of inflammation or general combustion could be found. By his merit with the popular party he had attained his present eminence, and was deter- mined to prelerve it by continuing his services. He Legre Ful. began the funcions of his office by proposing a law  to communicate the right of citizens to the allies or free inhabitants of Italy ; a measure which tended to weaken the power of the Senate, and to encreafe the number of citizens greatly beyond what could be assembled in one collective body. Having failed in this attempt, he substituted a proposal in appearance more moderate, but equally dangerous, That whoever claimed the right of citizen, in cafe of being cast by the Censors, who were thie per judges, might appeal to the People  . This would have conferred the power of naturalization on the popular leaders; and the danger of such"
"  Valerius Maximus,  iii.  4. Ls) Appian. Bell. Civ.  I."
"a measure"
"B a measure called upon the Senate to exert its"
" authority and influence in having this motion also
rejected.
When the Consul appeared to be fairly entered on his career, and, by uniting the power of the fu- preme magiltracy with that of a commissioner for dividing the property of lands, was likely to break through all the forms which had hitherto retarded the execution of the Agrarian law, he was with difficulty persuaded to assemble the Senate, and to take his place. The whole body joined in repre- fentations against these dangerous measures, and in a request that he would withdraw his motions. To there applications he made no reply  ; but an occasion soon offered, by which the Senate was en- abled to divert him from his purpose. A deputa- arrived from Marseilles, then in alliance with Rome, to intreat the support of the republic against the Salyii, a neighbouring nation, who had invaded their territories. The Senate gladly embraced this opportunity to find a foreign employment for the Consul, decreed a speedy aid to the city of Mar- feilles, and appointed  Fuivius Flaccus to that service. Although this incident marred or inter- rupted for the present his political designs, yet he was induced, by the hopes of a triumph, to accept of the command which offered, and, by his ab- fence, to relieve the city for a while from the alarms which he had given. Caius Gracchus too was gone in the capacity of Proquaxftor to Sardi- nia; and the Senate, if they could by any preteu- ces have kept those unquiet spirits at a distance, had iloes of restoring the former order of the common- wealth.
In this interval some laws are said to have passed respecting the office and conduct of the Censors. The particulars are not mentioned; but the objEt  Mx. .  probably
probably
probably was, to render the magifirate more cir A  cumfpe& in the admission of those who claimed to  be numbered as citizens. Such was likely to be'- the policy of the Senate, in the absence of dema- gogues, who, by proposing to admit the allies on the rolls of the People, had awakened dangerous pretensions in every corner of Italy. It soon ap- peared how seriously there pretensions were adopted by the country towns; for the inhabitants already befiirred themselves, and were beginning to devise how they might extort by force what they were not likely to obtain with consent of the original  nizens of Rome. A suspicion having arisen of such treasonable concerts forming at Fregelle, the Pretor Opimius had a special commiflion to inquire into the matter, and to proceed as he should find the occasion required. Having filmmoned the chief magifirate of the place to appear before him, he received, upon a promise of doing no violence to his person, full information of the combinations that had been forming against the government of Rome. So inftruted, he assembled such a force as was necessary to support him in asserting the au- thority of the State; and thinking it necessary to give a firiking example in a matter of so dangerous and infetious a nature, he ordered the place to be razed to the ground  .
By this act of severity, the designs of the alliesu.  629. were for a while suspended, and might have beenc .IrSU entirely suppressed, if the fations at Rome hadc.setis not given them fresh encouragement and hopes ofcvi ' success or impunity. This tranfation was scarcely pail, when Caius Gracchus appeared in the city to lolicit the office of Tribune; and, by his pretence, revived the hopes of the allies. Having observed, that the Proconsul Aurelius Cotta, under whom he (/)   Ix. Velleius Obfcquens. Cic.   Invention:; 1c 'Finibuc,   thctorius,  
served o I fenred as Proquefior in Sardinia, inflead of being
IL recalled, was continued in his command, and fur-
nilhed with reinforcements and supplies of every fort as for a service of long duration ; and fufpet-  that this measure was pointed at himself, and proceeded from a design to keep him at a diflance from the popular assemblies, he quitted his fiation in Sardinia, and returned without leave. He was called to account by the Censors for deserting his duty ; but defended himself with such ability and force, as greatly railed the expetations which had already been entertained by his party (i).
The law, he laid, required him only to carry arms ten years, he had actually carried them twelve years; although he might legally have quit- ted his station of Qa.ftor at the expiration of one year, yet he had remained in it three years. How- ever willing the Censors may have been to remove this pelt from the commonwealth, they were too weak to attempt any censure in this slate of his caule, and in the present humour of the People. They endeavoured, inSvain, to load him with a share in the plot of Fregella; he fill exculpated himself: and, if he had poifeifed every virtue of a citizen, in proportion to his resolution, application, eloquence, and even severity of manners, he might have been a powerful fipport to the State. In a ipeech to the People, on his return from Sardinia, he concluded with the following remarkable words:  The purse which I carried full to the province, ' I have brought empty back. Others empty the"
"wine casks which they carry from Italy, and bring  them from the provinces replenished with silver  and gold  .
In declaring himself a candidate for the office of Tribune, Caius Gracchus professed his intention to
(i) Fuiarch. in  racco. (,) A. GciliuS,    12.
propose
propose many popular laws. The Senate exertedc A  all their influence to difappoiit his views; but such ,, were the exeftations of the popular party through- out all Italy', thlatr they rodwded to the election in greater numbers than could find place in-the pub- lic square. They handed and reached out their ballots at the wiridows a'nd over the battlements; and Gracchus, though eleted, -was, in confe- quence of the opposition given to him, only fourth in the lift ().
Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, who, ever since the death of her son Tiberius, lived in tirement in Campania, upon hearing of the career which her son, Caius, was likely to run, alarmed at the renewal of a scene which had already occa- sioned her so much sorrow, expoilulated with him on the course he was taking; and, in an unaffected and paflionate address, spoke that ardent zeal for the republic, by which the citizens of Rome had been long distinguished. This high-minded woman, on whom the entire care of her family had devolved by the death of her husband, whilst the children were yet in their infancy, or under age, took care, with unusual at- tention, to have them educated for the rank they were to hold in the State, and did not fail even to excite their ambition. When Tiberius, after the dilfrace of Mancinus, appeared to withdraw from the road of preferments and honours,  How long, she said, \"'shall I be diitinguihed as the mother-  in law of Scipio, not as the mother of the Grac-  chi.? This latter diflintion, however, she came to potfefs; and it has remained with her name, but from circumstances and events which this refpeta- ble personage by no means appeared to desire. In one fragment of her letters to Caius, which is flill preserved, ' You will tell me, she said, that it
(I) Plutarch, Appian, OrofitF, Eutrop. Obfequens.  I.  is '"
"B OO  is glorious to be revenged of our enemies. No
.  one thinks so more than I, if we can be re. ^ '--. venged without hurt to the.republic; but if not,"
" often may our enemies escape. Long may they be safe, if the good of the commonwealth re.  quires their safety.' In another letter, which appears to be written after his intention of suing for the Tribunate was declared, she accoits him to the following purpose:  I take the Gods to wit-  nets, that except the persons who killed my son  Tiberius, no one ever gave me so much afflic-  as you do in this matter. You, from whom  I might have expedted some consolation in my  age, and who, surely, of all my children, ought ' to be most careful not to distress me! I have not  many years to live. Spare the republic so long  for my fake. Shall I never fee the madness of my family at an end ? When I am dead, you  will think to honour me with a parent rites;  but what honour can my memory receive from  you, by whom I am abandoned and dishonour-  while I live ? But, may the Gods forbid you
should persist! if you do, I fear the course you  are taking leads to remorse and difRrafion, which  will end only with your life (mn)."
"These remonfirances do not appear to have had any effect. Caius, upon his accession to the Tri- bunate, proceeded to fulfil the expectations of his - sm- party. The Agrarian law, though fiill in force, onia 2gs-had met with continued interruption and delay in ra.' the execution. It was even falling into neglect."
"Caius thought proper, as the firfi aa of his ma- giftracy, to move a renewal and confirmation of it, with express injunctions, that there should be an annual distribution of land to the poorer citizens  . (a) Fzagment Corn. Nepiois ab Andrea Scotto collean, edita Cum fcriptis Coin Nepotirs ( .) :. ib. Ix. Vcilciuc, 1ib. i'. Hyginus Limitibus. Appian,"
"d_ - .~ '!:~rlLr. To"
"To this he subjoined, in the first year of his office, A  a variety of regulations tending either to increase '* his popularity, or to diflinguifh his adminiflration  ' Upon his motion, public granaries were ereaed,Lex fru. and a law was made, that the corn should be iffuedentaria. from thence monthly to the People, two parts in twelve under the prime or original cost  ."
"This at gave a check to industry, which is the best guardian of manners in populous cities, or wherever multitudes of men are crowded toge- ther."
"Caius likewise obtained a decree, by which the estates of Attalus, king of Pergamus, lately queathed to the Romans, should be let in the manner of other lands under the infpetion of the Censors; but the rents, initead of being made part of the public revenue, should be allotted for the maintenance of the poorer citizens  . Another, by which any person deposed from an an office of magistracy by the People, was to be deemed for ever disqualified to serve the republic in any other capacity (q). This was intended to operate against avius, who by the influence of Tiberius, had been degraded from the office of Tribune; and the act took its title from the name of the person against whom it was framed."
"An aA to regulate the conditions of the military service  , by which no one was obliged to enter before seventeen years of age, and by which Ro- man soldiers were to receive cloathing as well as pay  ; possibly the first introdution of a uniform into the Roman Legions; a circumstance which, in modern times, is thought so essential to the cha- rater of troops, and the appearance of an army.   Semife & tricenti, for a halfand a third,   Plutarch.Appian.    Florus,  iii.  xi . Ciccr. in Verrcm. (q) Privilegium in Octavium.   militun commodis. (I) Plutarch in  Graccho.-Lex Scmpronia libcrtate civium."
"Z 2 By"
"B - By the celebrated law of Porcius, which allowed"
"I. of an appeal to the People, every citizen had a '' remedy against any oppressive sentence or pro-"
"ceeding of the executive magifirate; but this did not appear to Gracchus a sufficient refiraint on the officers of State. He proposed to have it enated, that no person, under pain of a capital punishment, should at all proceed against a citizen without a special commiflion or warrant from the People to that effect. And he proposed to give this law a retrofpet, in order to comprehend Popilius  nas , who being Consul in the. year after the troubles occasioned by Tiberius Gracchus, had, under the authority of the Senate alone, proceeded to try and condemn such as were accessary to that sedition. Lanas perceived the form that was ga- thering againfit him, and chose to avoid it by a voluntary exile. This aft was indeed almost an entire abolition of government, and a bar to the exercise of such ordinary powers as were necefary to the peace of the commonwealth. A popular faction could withhold every power, which, in their apprehension, might be employed againfi them- selves; and in their molt pernicious designs had no interruption to fear from the Didator nam- by the Senate and Consuls, nor from the Consul armed with the authority of the Senate for the suppression ofdiforders; a resource to which the republic had frequently owed its preservation. As we find no change in the proceedings of the State upon this new regulation, it is probable that the absurdity of the law prevented its effe "
"While Gracchus thus proposed to make all the powers of the State depend for their exittence on the occasional will of the People, he meant to ren- der the afeemblies of the People themselves more democratical by firipping the higher classes of the"
"(.) Ciccr. in Cluentio; pro Rlbino; pro domo fua."
"prerogative"
"prerogative, precedence, or influence they pof A  sessed, in leading the publicdecifions. The Centu- ' ries being hitherto called to vote in the order of their  classes, those of the first or highest class, by voting firlf, set an example which was often followed by the whole (i). By the statute of Gracchus, the Centuries were required, in every queflion, to draw lots for the prerogative, and gave their votes in the order they had drawn.
Under this active Tribune, much public bufi- ness, that used to pass through the Senate, was engrossed by the popular assemblies. Even in the form of there assemblies, all appearance of refpeat to the Senate was laid aside. The Rofira, or plat- form on which the presiding magifRrate flood, was placed in the middle of an area, of which one part was the market-place, surrounded with falls and booths for merchandize, and the courts of jutlice; the other part, called the Comitium, was open to receive the People in their public atfemblies; and on one of it, fronting the Rotfra, or bench of the magistrates, flood the Curia, or Senate-houfe. The People, when any one was speaking, flood partly in the market-place, and partly in the Co- mitium. The speakers directed their voice to the Comitium, so as to be heard in the Senate. This disposition, Gracchus reverted, and-directing his voice to the Forum, or market-place, seemed to displace the Senate, and deprive that body of their office as watchmen and guardians of the public order in matters that came before the popular as- fernblies  .
At the time that the Tribune Caius Gracchus engaged the minds of his contemporaries, and fur- nifhed history chiefly with there effects of his facti- ous and turbulent spirit, it is observed, that he   The firlt Century was called the Prerogativa.    Varro  Re Rullica,  i.   Cic. Amicitia. Plutarch. in Vit. Caii acchi.
himself o himself executed works of general utility; bridges,  highways, and other public accommodations '-- throughout Italy. And that the State having car-
ried its arms, for the first time, over the Alps, hap- pily terminated the war with the Salyii, a nation of Gaul, whose territory became the first province of Rome in that country. And that Caius Sextius, Consul of the preceding year, was authorised to place a colony in the neighbourhood of the hot springs, which, from his name, were called the Aqua Sextim, and are tiill known by a corruption of the fame appellation  .
From Asia, at the fame time, it was reported, that Ariarathes, the king of Cappadocia, and ally of the Romans, was murdered, at the intfigation of Mithridates, king of Pontus, whose fifier he had married; that he had left a son for whom Mithri- dates affeced to secure the kingdom; but that the widowed queen having fallen into the hands of Ni- comedes, king of Bythinia, this prince, in her right, had taken poffeflion of Cappadocia, while Mithridates, in name of his nephew, was hastening to remove him from thence. On this fubje& a solution was declared in the assembly of the People at Rome, that both Nicomedes and Mithridates should be required immediately to evacuate Cap- padocia, and to withdraw their troops. This refo- lution Caius Gracchus opposed with all his elo- quence and his credit, charging his antagonists aloud with corruption, and a clandestine corre- fpondence with the agents, who, on different fides, were now employed at Rome in soliciting this as- fair.  None of us, he said,  sand forth in this  place for nothing. Even I, who desire you to ' put money in your own coffers, and to consult : the interest of the State, mean to be paid, not ; wiith money indeed, but with your favour and
  At Aix, in Prorence.
a good"
"a good name. Tlhey who oppose this. resolution A  likewirfecovet, not honours from you, but mo- I '' 1 from' Nicomnedes; and'they who support it, expet'to 'be paid by'Mithridates, not by you. As'for those wHo are'filent, they, I believe, un-  deritand the market best of all. They have ' heard the fory 'of the poet. who'being vain that ' he'had got a great fiin of money for rehearsing 'a tragedy, was'told:by another, that it was not ' woriderful' he. had got  inuch for talking,  when I:';faid' the theher, 'who it seems knew
more('than' he was wifhed'to declare, have got ten, fimnes as much for' holding my tongue. ': Tere'is- rothing that a king will buy at so great  a ptice,; on occasion, as filerlce  .
Such', at'tirhes, was the style, in which this po- pular 'oratir chose 'to address his audience. Indi- viduals are won by flattery, the multitude by bus- fooneiry-? tiid.atire. From the tendency of this ifeech, it 'appears to have been the opinion of Gracchtis, .not that the Romans should sequester the Rirdidom of Cappadocia for the heirs of Ariara- thes,:'but'that' they should seize it for themselves. The''qiefti6n, however, which now arose relating to the'fiuceflion to this kingdom, laid the founda- of :a tedious and bloody war, of which the operations and events will occur 'in their place.'
Gracchus, on the approach of the election of   69. Consuls, eiployed all his credit and influence to )on,;ij' support Caius' Fannius, in opposition to Opimius, ntiAlcino- who, 'by-his':vigilance and' activity in fipprefling rbl. the treasonable designs of -the allies at Fregellae, had incurred the displeasure of the popular party; and Fanniiius'being accordingly chosen, together with Cn.' Domitius Ahenobarbus, Gracchus ceeded to' offer:' himself as a candidate to be re-"
"  A. Gellius,    Ic."
"eleAed"
"B O elected into the office of. Tribune. In. this he .fol-"
", _ lowed the example of his brother Tiberius in a:flep,"
"which, being reckoned illegal as well as alarming, was that which hastened his ruin. An attempt'had been since made by Papirius Carbo to have.the le- gality of such re-elections acknowvledged 5,but this having failed, Caius Gracchus, with:greatiaddrefs, inserted in one of his popular edicts, a clause  claring it competent for the People  re-elet .a Tribune, in cafe he should need a contiiuatioin of his power in order to fulfil his public engagemnents. To avail himself of this clause, he  .i declared, that his views in behalf of the People were ,farfrom being accomplished. Under this pretenej.ie ob- tained a preference to one of the new candidates, and greatly strengthened the tribunitian power by the prospect of its repeated renewals, and..duration for an indefinite time. .-. i.- sera Upon his re-election, Caius, continuing'his  '?-'.~ ministration upon the fame plan of animosity to
the Senate, obtained a law to deprive that body of the share which his brother had left them-in tlie courts of justice; and ordaining, that the judges, for the future, should be draughted from .the Equefirian order alone, a class of men, who.being left out of the Senate, and of course not compre- hended in the laws that prohibited commerce, had betaken themselves, as has been observed  , to lucrative professions, were the farmers of the reve- nue, the contrators for the army, and,, in general, the merchants who conducted the whole trade of the republic. Though they might be confidered as neutral in the diiputes of the Senate and. People, and therefore impartial where the other orders were biassed, there was no class of men more likely to prostitute the character of judges for interest or adual hire. This revolution in the courts of jus-
  Page 295.
tice
tice .accordingly.may have contributed greatly toc A  hasen. the approaching corruption of manners, and  the disorders of the government."
"The next ordinance prepared by Gracchus, orLexdel'ro- ascribed to him, related to the nomination of offi-'ordi- cers to gbvern-the provinces, and, if it had been llrit.ly observed, might have made rome compen- fation for the former. The power of naming such officers was. committed to the Senate, and the arrangements ye.re to be annually made before the elctionn.bf'Corifutrs.' This continued to be law, but was often'over-/ruled by the People (a).
In the fame year, the boldest and moil danger- ous project that had'ever been formed by any of the popular leaders,..that for admitting the Italian allies upon the'rolls'of the Roman People, already attemptcd by Fulvius Flaccus, was again renewed by Caius Gracchus.; and, upon the utmost exertion of the vigilance and authority of the Senate, with grea'tdifiiulty prevented.
The rumour of this projet having brought mul- titudes to Rome, the Senate thought it neceflary to give;the-Cbnfuls in charge to clear the city, on the day that this important queflion was expeced to come on, of all firangers, and not to fiffer any aliens to remain within four miles of the walls. During the dependence of this queflion, Gracchus flattered the poorer citizens with the profped of advantageous settlements, in certain new colonies, of fix thousand men each, which he proposed to plant in the diflricts of Campania and Tarentum, the molt cultivated parts of Italy, and in colonies, which he. likewise proposed to fend abroad into some of the richefi provinces. Such settlements had been formerly made to occupy and secure cent conquest; they were now calculated to serve '(a)Florus,    13. Sallust. Bell. Jugurth. No. 621. Ci- cero Provineiis Confularibus.
as o as baits to popular favour, and as a provifon, made by the leaders of faation, for their own
friends and adherents.
The Senate, attacked by such popular arts, solved to retort on their adversaries; and for this purpose infiruc Marcus Livius, another of the Tribunes, to take such measures as should, if pof. fible, supplant Gracchus in the favour of the Peo- ple. Livius, profefling to at in concert with the Senate, proposed a number of adts: one to conci- liate the minds of the allies, by giving 'hem, while they served in the arrriy, the fame exemp- from corporal punishment, which the Roman citizens had enjoyed. Le.Li;iade Another for the establishment of twelve different 'uC''ni colonies, each of three thousand citizens. But  ;i,. what, possibly, had the greatest effect, because it
appeared to exceed in munificence all the edicts of Gracchus, was an exemption of all those lands, which should be distributed in terms of the late Semproniaa Law, from all quit-rents and public burdens, which had hitherto, in general,. been laid on all poffeifions that were held from the Pub- lic  . It was proposed to name ten commiflion- ers to distribute lands thus unincumbered to the People; and three colonies are mentioned, Sylla- ceum, Tarentum, and Neptunia, as having been acAually ent abroad this year, and probably on these terms. I.-a.i:. About the fame time it was decreed, that the
city of Carthage might be rebuilt for the reception of a colony of fix thousand Roman citizens. This decree bears the name, not of Sempronius or of Livius, but of Rubrius, another Tribune of the fame year.
The Senate readily agreed to the settlement of :hefe colonies, as li to carry off a number of  ?i;tar.-- :. ^ 1;. ;  ajr ^ dl  bu, Rorman 
the
the more faaious citizens, and to furnish an op- A  portunity likewise of removing from the city, for ',.. some time, the popular leaders themselves, under pretence cf employing them to condu& and to fettle the families destined to form those establish- ments. Accordingly, Caius Gracchus, and Ful- vius Flaccus, late Consul, and now deeply en- gaged in all these factious measures, were dellined to take charge of the new colonifis, and to super- intend their settlement  .
In the mean time, the Senate, in the election ofU. 63. Opimius to the Confulihip of the following year,oplmiu, carried an important objeat to the reputation andO-  interest of their party, and conceived hopes of be-Max  able, by the authority of this magifirate, to combat the designs of Gracchus more effetually than they had hitherto done. He was accordingly retained in the adminifiration of affairs in Italy, while his colleague, Fabius, was appointed to command in Gaul, Caius Gracchus, having the presumption to offer himself a third time candidate for the office of Tribune, was rejected, and had the mortification to find that the authority of the Senate began to prevail; and, as they had credit enough to procure his exclusion from any share in the magifiracy, so they might be able to fruitrate or reverie many of the ats he had obtained in fa- vour of his party.
By the repulse of Gracchus and his associates, the ariftocratical party came to have a majority, even in the college of Tribunes. Questions of le- giflation were now likely to be determined in the assembly of the Centuries; and this circumfiance alone, while the Senate was able to retain it, was equal to an entire revolution of the government. The Centuries, under the leading of an active Consul, were likely to annul former resolutions
  Plutarch. Appian. Orofius.
with o . with the fame decision and rapidity with which
- they had been passed. Much violence was ex-
pecked, and the different parties, recollecting what had happened in the cafe of Tiberius Gracchus, took meafires not to be surprised by their antago- nifts; for the most part came to the place of as- fembly in bands, even under arms, and endea- voured to possess the advantage of the ground as in the presence of an enemy.
Minucius, one of the Tribunes, in consequence of a resolution of the Senate, pretending that he was moved by some unfavourable presages, posed a repeal or amendment of some of the late popular acts; and particularly, to change the def- tination of the colony intended for Carthage, to some other place. This motion was strenuously opposed by Fulvius Flaccus, and by Caius Grac- chus, who treated the report of presages from Africa as a mere fiction, and the whole design as proceeding from the inveterate hatred of the No- bles to the People. Before the assembly met, in which this queiion was to be decided, there popu- lar leaders attempted to seize the Capitol, but found themselves prevented by the Consul, who had already, with an armed force, secured that fiation.
In the morning after they had received this appointment, the People being assembled, and the - Consul being employed in offering up the custom- arv sacrifices, Gracchus, with his party, came to their place in the Comitium. One of the attend- ants of the Consul, who was carrying away the entrails of the victim, reproached Gracchus, as he paired, with sedition, and bid him desist from his machinations against the government of the monwealth. On this provocation, one of the party of Gracchus firuck the Consul officer with his dag- ger, and killed him on the spot. The cry of mur- der ran through the multitude, and the assembly
began
began to break up. Gracchus endeavoured toc A  speak, but could not be heard for the tumult; and   all thoughts of business were laid aside. The ~' ful immediately summoned the Senate to meet; and having reported what had happened in the Comitium, and what appeared to him the first a& of hoffility in a war, which the popular fation had prepared againfi the State, he received the charge that was usual on perilous occasions, to provide, in the manner which his own prudence should di- re&, for the safety of the commonwealth. Thus authorised, he commanded the Senators and the Knights to arm, and made proper dispositions to secure the principal streets. Being malter of the Capitol and Forum, he adjourned the assembly of the People to the usual place on the following day, and cited the persons accused of the murder to answer for the crime which was laid to their charge.
In consequence of this adjournment, and the Coniul inftrutions, numbers in arms repaired to the Comitium at the hour of assembly, and were ready to execute such orders as they might receive for the public safety. Gracchus and Fulvius futed to answer the citation, and the Capitol being secured against them, they took post, with a nu- merous party in arms, on the Aventine Hill, which was opposite to the Capitol, and from which they equally looked down on the Forum and place of assembly. Being again cited to appear at the Tri- bunal of the Roman people, they sent a young man, one of the sons of Fulvius, to capitulate with the Consul, and to fettle the terms on which they were to surrender themselves. Upon this message they were told, in return, that they muff answer at the bar of the assembly, as criminals, not tend to negotiate with the republic, as equals; that no party, however numerous, was entitled to parley with the People of Rome: and to this an-
fwer 0 fwer the meflenger was forbid, at his peril, to
IL bring any reply. The party, however, still hoped \"to gain time, or to divide their enemies; and they
ventured to employ young Fulvius again to repeat their meTfage. He was seized by the Consul or- der. Gracchus and Fulvius, with their adherents, were declared public enemies; and a reward was offered to the person who should kill or secure them. They were instantly attacked, and, after a little resistance, forced from their ground. Gracchus fled by the wooden bridge to the oppo- site of the river, and was there slain, either by his own hand, or by that of a faithful servant, who had undertaken the talk of saving him in his last extremity from falling into the power of his ene. mies. Fulvius was dragged to execution from a bath where he attempted to conceal himself. The heads of both were carried to the Consul, and ex- changed for the promised reward.
In this fray the party of the Senate, being regu- larly armed and prepared for slaughter, cut off the adherents of Caius Gracchus and Fulvius in great- er numbers than they had done those of Tiberius; they killed about three thousand two hundred and fifty in the streets, and confined great numbers who were afterwards firangled in the prisons. The bodies of the slain, as the law ordained, in the cafe of treason, being denied the forms of a funeral, were cast into the river, and their estates confif- cated  .
The house of Fulvius was rated to the ground, the area laid open for public uses; and, from these beginnings, it appeared that the Romans, who in the purfnit of their foreign conquefis, had so li- berally ifed the blood of other nations, might come equally lavish of their own.   Appian. Plutarch. Orofiu,     i-2. Florns,  iii.  15. Auaor dc iri IlluLaibus,  65. A    State of Order and Tranquillity which followed the
Spprefion of the late Tum2ults.-A-ppearance of Caius Marius.-Fo reign Wlars.-Complaints agairti .jugurtha.-Appearance of the Cimbri.-War with yugurtha.-Camnpaign and Treaty of Pifo. i- gurtha came to Rome with a safe Conducti.-Ob- liged to retire fron thence.--Campaign of Metellus. -Of Marius.--Jugurtha betrayed by Bocchus.- His Death, after the Triumph of Marius.-This General re-eleeed, in order to command again2j the Cimbri. HE popular party had, in the late tumults A 
carried their violence to such extremes, as  dilgufted and alarmed every person who had any desire ofdomeftic peace; and in their ill advised course to arms, but too well juitified the measures which had been taken againfi them. By this ex- ertion of vigour, the Senate, and ordinary ma- gifirates, recovered their former authority; affairs returned to their usual channel, and the most per- set order seemed to arise from the late confusions. Questions of legislation were allowed to take their rife in the Senate, and were not carried to the Peo- ple, without the sanction of the Senate authority. The legislative power was exercised in the assembly of the Centuries, and the prohibitory or defensive function of the Tribunes, or representatives of the People, was such, as to prevent the abuses of the executive power in the hands of the ariflocracy, without flopping the proceedings of government, or fubtiituting ademocratical usurpation in its place. Even the judicative power, vested in the Equefirian
order, o order, promised to have a salutary effec, by keep- I_>_., a balance between the different ranks and tinttions of men in the republic.
The ariflocratical party, notwithstanding the as- cendant they had recently gained, did not attempt to rescind any of the regular inftitutions'of Grac- chus; they were contented with infliting punish. ments on those who had been accessary to the late sedition, and with re-establishing such of the No- bles as had suffered by the violence of the popu- lar faction. Popilius Lanas, driven into exile by one of the edicts of Gracchus, or by the persecution to which it exposed him, was now recalled upon the motion of Calpurnius Pifo,. one of the Tri- bunes (a).   633. As the state of parties was in rome measure Pub  versed, Papirius Carbo thought proper to. withdraw  Pi-from the popular  and, by the credit of those '; crnow in poffefiion of the government, was promot-"
"ed to the fiation of Consul, and yielded the first fruits of his conversion by defending the cause of his predecessor Opimius, who, at the expiration of his Consulate, was brought to trial for having put Roman citizens to death without the forms of law. Carbo, though himself connected with those who suffered, now pleaded the justice and necessity of the late military executions; and, upon this plea, obtained the acquittal of his client."
"This merit on the part of Carbo, however, did not so far cancel his former offences as to prevent his being tried and condemned in the following year, as an accomplice in the sedition of Gracchus. He was supposed to have been accessary to the death of Scipio; and his cause not being warmly espoused by any party, he fell a :sacrifice to the imputation of this heinous crime. It is said, that, upon hearing his sentence, he killed himself  . (a) Cicero in Bruto.   Valerin; Max.  iii.  7. Cicero in Bru "
"Otavius"
"Odavius, one of the Tribunes of the present A  year, moved an amendment of the law obtained, i . by Gracchus, refpeEting the distribution of cornLe-oaa. from the public granaries, probably to ease thevi Pm treasury in part of that burden; but the particu-mentar lars are unknown."
"About this time the celebrated Caius Marius gan to appear in the public assemblies of the Peo-  He was a person of obscure birth, and rufiic manners, formed amidfl the occupations of a peasant  , and the hardships of a legionary fol- dier, but of a resolute spirit, and insatiable ambi-  He was a native of Arpinum, and without any other apparent title than that of being a deni- son of Rome, laid claim to the honours of the State. He is remarkable for having suffered more repulses in his firfi attempts to be elected into of: fice, and for having succeeded more frequently as- terwards than any other Roman citizen during the existence of the commonwealth. Marius, after being disappointed in his first can- vas for the office of Tribune, succeeded in the following year. The ads which were passed un- der his Tribunate, and which bear his name, do not carry any violent expressions of party-fpirit, nor give intimation of that insatiate ambition with which he afterwards distressed his country; the firftLex Muri related to the condut of elections, and providedde slffra, fime remedy for an evil which was complained of ' in the manner of soliciting votes. The space tween the rails, by which the citizens passed to give in their ballots, was so broad as to admit, not only those who came to vote, but the candidates likewise, with their adherents and friends, who came to importune and to overawe the People in the very adt of delivering their votes. Marius posed to put an end to this practice, and to   Juvenal. S2t.  Pln.  xxxiii.    I. A a vide O for the entire freedom of the People, by nar-"
"rowing the entrance, so that only the voters could pals. A party of the Nobles, with Aurelius Cotta the Consul at their head, not knowing with what a resolute spirit they were about to contend, being averse to this reformation, prevailed on the Senate to withhold its authority, without which any regu- lar cquefion on this subjed, could not be put to the People. But Marius, in the character of Tri- bune, threatened the Consul with immediate im- prilonment, if he did not move to recall this vote of the Senate. The matter being re-considered, Lucius Metellus, who was firfi on the Rolls, hav- given his voice for affirming the first decree, as ordered by Marius into custody; and there being no Tribune to intercede for him, mufi have gone to prison, if the dispute had not-terminated by the majority agreeing to have the matter carried to the People, as Marius proposed, with the Sanc- of the Senate authority."
"In another of the ats of Marius the republic was fiil more indebted to his wisdom and courage, in wi.hfianding an attempt of one of his colleagues to flatter the indigent citizens at the expence of the public treasury, by repealing the recent regulation of ('Ctavius, and lowering the terms on which corn was distributed from the granaries. This was an ordinary expedient of Tribunitian faftion. ilarius opposed it as of dangerous consequence. And his conduc in this matter marked him out as one not to be awed by any party, and a person, who, into .hate-ver party he should be admitted, was dcftined tn govern. The times indeed were likel to give more importance to his character as a f1cdier than as a citizen; and in that he was fill if.rther laifd above the malice of those who were incl,:  to revile or undervalue what were called his up art pretensions  ."
"  rlutarch. in Mario"
"From"
"From the time that the Romans first passed into A  the Transalpine Gaul, as auxiliaries to the republic  of Marseilles, they had kept on foot in that neigh- bourhood a military force; and, by planting colo- nies at convenient flations, shewed their intention of maintaining poffeflions on that of the Alps. Betultus, or Betultich, a prince of the country, who was supposed able to raise a force of two hun- dred thousand men, attempted to expel these truders, but was defeated, first by the Proconsul Fabius, afterwards by Domitius Ahenobarbus, and furnished these generals with the fubjeQs of their refpcdive triumphs. This prince himself became acaptive to Domitius, and was carried to Rome, where he was led in proceflion, diftingtiilhed by his painted arms and his chariot of silver, the equi- page in which it was said he usually led his army to battle  ."
"It appears that the Romans had employed ele-.  6;3. phants in the first wars they made in Gaul; for the victory of Domitius is attributed to the effect that was produced by. these animals  ."
"Quintus Marcius succeeded Domitius in the' command of the forces which were employed in Gaul, and continued to gain ground on the na- tives, who appeared from different cantons fuccef- fively to resist his arms. He planted a colony at Narbo, to firengthen the frontier of the newly-ac- quired province on one  and as the Romans had hitherto always passed by tea into that country, he endeavoured to open a paflage by the Alps, in order to'have a communication by land with Italy on the other. In the'courfe of there operations the Staeni, an Alpine nation that opposed him, were entirely cut off.   Velleius Pater. Ainmianus Marcell.   fine. Padionus in Vcrrinam Sccundam. Val. Max.    9.   Suetonius in Vita Neronis."
"A a 2 About"
"B o About this time the Roman generals obtained"
"- their triumphs on different quarters, in the Baliares"
"and in Dalmatia, as well as in Gaul; and the public did not meet for some years with an enemy able to resist her power, except on the of Thrace and the Danube, where the Proconsul Cato was defeated; and where a refifiance was for some years kept up by the natives."
"But of the foreign affairs which occupied the at- tention of the Romans, the most memorable was the contest of pretenders to the crown of Numidia, which, by the death of Micipfa, the son and fuc- ceffor of Massinissa, came to be disposed of about this time. The late king had two sons, Adherbal and Hiempfal. He had likewise adopted Jugur- tha, the natural son of his brother Manaftabal, whom he-had employed at the head of his armies, thinking it safer to gain him by good offices, than to provoke him by a total exclusion from favour. He had formed a proje&, frequent among barba- rous and despotic sovereigns, but always ruinous, to divide his territories; and he hoped that, while he provided for his own sons, he [hould secure to them, from motives of gratitude, the protection and good offices of Jugurtha, whom he admitted to an equal share with them in the partition of his kingdom. The consequences of this mistaken ar- rangement soon appeared in the distractions that followed, and which arose from the ambition of Jugurtha, to make himself malter of the whole. For this purpose he formed a secret design against the lives of both the brothers, of whom the younger, Hiempfal, fell into his snare, and was assassinated. Adherbal, being more cautious, obliged his crafty enemy to declare himself openly, took the field against him, with all the forces he could raise, but was defeated, and obliged to take refuge in the Roman province, and from thence thought proper"
"to"
"to pass into Italy, in order to lay his complaints A  before the Senate and People of Rome. I."
"Mafliniffa, the grandfather of this injure prince, had given effe&ual aid to the Romans in their wars with Carthage; and, upon the final reducion of that republic, was rewarded with a considerable part of its spoils. From this time forward the Ro- mans expe  and the king of Numidia paid to them, a deference like that of a vassal or tributary prince to his sovereign lord. Upon the faith of this connection, Adherbal now carried his plaints to Rome; and Jugurtha, knowing how ready the Romans were, in the characer of arbi- trators, to confider themselves as the sovereigns of other nations, thought proper to fend deputies on his part, to counteract the representations of his rival."
"This crafty adventurer had served under Scipio at the siege of Numantia, where he had an oppor- tunity of observing the manners and discipline of the Romans, and accommodated himself to both. He was equally diffinguifhed by his implicit sub- mifflon to command, as by his impetuous courage, and by the ability of his conduEt in every service. He had even then probably directed his views to the fucceflion of Numidia, and saw of what confe- quence the Romans might prove in deciding his fortunes. He had studied their character, and had already marked out the line he was to follow in conducting his affairs with that People. They ap- peared to be a number of sovereigns assembled together, able in council and formidable in the field; but, in comparison to the Africans in gene- ral, undesigning and simple. With the pride of monarchs they began, he imagined, to feel the digence of courtiers, and were to be moved by considerations of interels rather than force. His commissioners were now accordingly furnished with ample presents, and with the means of grati-"
"fying"
"B o lfying the principal persons at Rome in a manner ,-- -that was suited to their refpec'ive ranks and to their"
"influence in the commonwealth."
"In the choice of this plan Jugurtha, like moit po- liticians that refine too much, had formed a system with great ingenuity, and spoke of it with a fpe- ous wit; but had not taken into his account the whole circumstances of the cafe in which he en- gaged. Rome, he supposed, was a city to be fold. He forgot that, though many Romans could be bought, no treasure was sufficient to buy the repub- lic; that to buy a few, made it necessary for him to buy many more; that as he raised expectations, the number of expeaants increased without limit; that the more he gave, the more he was fiill ex- pected to give; that in a state which was broke to parties, if he gained one by his gifts, that alone was fuiffcient to rouse the other againit him. And accordingly, after lavishing his money to influ- ence the councils of Rome, he was obliged to have recourse to arms at last, and to contend with the forces of the republic, after he had ex- haufted his treaflire in attempting to corrupt her virtue."
"Although Jugurtha had many partisans at Rome, such was the injustice of his cause, or the suspicion of corruption in those who espoused it, that they durst not openly avow their wishes. They endea- voured to suspend the resolutions which were in agitation againfi him, and had the matter referred to ten commiflioners who should go into Africa, and in presence of the parties fettle the differences which fhbfiiied between them. There indeed he practised his art on the Roman commiflioners with better fiucees than he had experienced with the Se- nate and People. He prevailed upon them to di- vide the kingdom, and to favour him in the lot wvhich should be afligned to himself: knowing that force must ultimately decide every controversy"
"which"
"which should arise on the fubjeit, he made choice A  not of the richest, but of the most warlike division;  and indeed had already determined that, as soon as the Romans left Africa, he should make an end of the contest by the death of Adherbal ; trufiing that, by continuing to use the specific which it was said he had already applied, he might prevail on the Romans to overlook what they would not, on a vious request, have permitted."
"He accordingly, soon after the departure of the Roman commiflioners, marched into the territories of Adherbal, shut him up in the town of Cir:a; and, while the Romans sent him repeated nmeilages to defif, fill continued the blockade, until the mcr- cenaries of Adherbal, tired of the hardships they were made to endure, advised, and, by their ap- pearing ready to dci'ert, forced him to commit him- ftlf to the mercy of Jugurtha, by whom he was im- mediately put to death."
"By these events, in about seven years from the death of Micipfa, Jugurtha had attained to the ob- ject of his highest desires; but the arts which cured him a crown, likewise rendered his slate secure. He was disappointed in his expectation to pacify the Romans. The money he dealt went tothe coffers only of a few, but his cimes roured the indignation of the whole People. PraEtifed fatefmen or politicians are seldom routed by mere feelings of indignation on the subjel of private wrongs. They have, or pretend to have, reasons of slate to suppress the consideration of individuals. The greater part of the Roman Senate according- ly, whether acting on maxims of policy, or won by the presents of Jugurtha, received the complaints which were lodged against him with indifference; but the aflembly of the People, moved by the cries of perfidy and murder which were railed by the Tribunes, received the representations of his duct with indignation and rage. These pafiions"
"were"
"B 0 0 were inflamed by opposition to the Nobles, who"
"were supposed to favour the murderer. Neither the most deliberate Statesman nor the most deter- mined partizan of Jugurtha durfl appear in his cause, nor propose to decline a war with that prince, although it was likely to be attended with considerable difficulties; and was to be under- taken at a time when a cloud hung over Italy on the of Gaul, a quarter from which the Romans always expe  and often experienced, the mofi terrible fiorms.  640. About the time that Adherbal laid his complaints"
"against gurtha before the Senate of Rome, a new enemy had appeared. The north of Europe, or of Asia, had cast off a swarm, which, migrating to the south and to the weft, was first descried by the Romans on the frontier of Illyricum, and fently drew their attention to that  The horde was said to consist of three hundred thousand fight- men, conducting their families of women and children, and covering the plains with their cattle. The Consul Papirius Carbo was ordered to take polt in Illyricum, to observe the motions of this tremen- dous hofl. He was alarmed with their teeming to point towards the diftrid of Aquileia; and putting himself, with too little precaution, in their way, could not withiland their numbers, and was over- whelmed as by a tempest."
"This migrating nation the Romans have called by the name of Cimbri, without determining from whence they came. It is said that their cavalry amounted to no more than fifteen thousand; that it was their practice to despise horses, as well as the other spoils of their enemies, which they generally lroyed: and from this circumstance it may be argued, that they were not of Scythian extraction, nor sprung from those mighty plains in the northern parts of Asia, where military force has from time immemorial confifed of cavalry, where horses"
"were"
"were valded above every other species of acquifiti- A  on or property; and that they must have been bred '_, amongst mountains and woods, where tlis animal is not equally useful. On their helmets, which were cretted with pluines of feathers, they carried the gaping jaws of wild bealts. On their bodies they wore breaft-lates of iron, had shields painted of a corifpicuous colour; and carried two misfile javelins or darts, and a heavy sword. They col- le their fighting men, for the most part, into a solid square, equally extending every way: in one of their battles it was reported that the fides of this square extended thirty fiadia, or between three and four miles. The men of the foremost ranks were fastened together with chains locked to their girdles, which made them impenetrable to every attack, and gave them the force of a torrent, in sweeping obflrutions before them. Such were the accounts with which the Romans were alarmed on the ap- proach of this tremendous enemy."
"Although, by the defeat of Carbo, Italy lay open to their devastations, yet they turned away to the north and the westward, and keeping the Alps on their left, made their appearance again on the frontier of the Roman province in Narbonne Gaul, and from thence passed into Spain, where they continued to alarm Roman settlements and kept Rome itself in fufpence, by the uncertainty of the trad they might afterwards choose to pursue."
"Such was the fiate of affairs, when the popularu.  64. cry and generous indignation of the Roman Peo-luscpio pie forced the State into a war with Jugurtha. Nafc. The Consul Pifo was appointed to command in,,iL, 1C Numidia. The necessary levies and supplies forRBl'a. this service were ordered, and Jugurtha could no longer doubt that the force of the Roman republic was to be employed against him; yet, in hopes to avert the storm, he sent his son, with two proper"
"affitlants,"
"- o afifiants, in the quality of ambassadors to Rome,"
"n chiefly trufling to the arts of insinuation he had ' hitherto practised, and to the distribution of pre-"
"'sents and of money. Their arrival being reported to the Senate, a resolution of this body passed, that, unless they brought an offer from Jugurtha to surrender his person and his kingdom at difcre-  they should be required in ten days to depart from Italv."
"This answer being delivered to the son of Ju- gurtha, he rre'ently withdrew, and was followed by . lora-an army, which was prepared to embark for Afi-ica. The war was conduAed at first with : vivacity and success: but Jugurtha, by of- fc:;ng great public cencefiions or private gratifi- -:ons, prevai on the Consul to negotiate. It was ailcec, that, upon receiving a proper hoflage on thc part of the Romans, the king himself mhould repair to thdr camp, in order to conclude the trea- ty. in the articles that were made public, the king agreed to firrender himself at discretion, and to pay a large contribution in horses, corn, ele- phants, and money ; but in secret articles, which were drawn up at the fame time, the Consul en- gaged that the person of the king should be safe, and that the kingdom of Numidia mhould be le- cured to him."
"During there tranfations the time of the expira- of Pifo command drew near, and he himself vas called into Italy to preside at the approaching election. His report of the treaty with Jugurtha was received with suspicion, and the cry of corrup- resumed by the popular party.  Where is  this captive ? said the Tribune Memmius;  if  he have surrendered himself, he will obey your commands ; fend for him; queflion him in  spect to what is pall. If he refutes to come, we  fhal! know what to think of a treaty which brings  impunity to Jugurtha, princely fortunes to a few
,, private
: private persons, ruin and infamy to the Roman A   republic. Upon this motion the Prxetor Caflius  Longinus, a person of approved merit and un- shaken integrity, was hastened into Africa, with positive inftrutions to bring the king of Numidia to Rome. By the fafe-conduEt which Callits brought on the part of the republic, and by his own assurances of protection, Jugurtha was vailed on to commit himself to the faith of the Ro- mans. He laid aside his kingly fiate and atten- dants, set out for Italy, and determined to appear as a suppliant at Rome. Upon his arrival, being called into the public aflembly, Memmius pnfed to interrogate him on the libjedt of his liip- poled secret tranfaCion with certain members of the Senate; bhit here Bebius, another of the Tri- bunes, iuterpoild his negative; and, notwithliand- that the People exclaimed, and even menaced, this Tribune perlifled. And before this bar to the larther examination of Jugurtha could be removed, an incident took place, which occasioned his iudden departure from Italy.
Malliva, the son of Guluffa, being the grandson and natural representative of Mafliniffa, and the only person betides Jugurtha who remained of the royal line of Numidia, had been persuaded by Albinus, the Consul elected for the ensuing year, to state his pretensions before the Roman Senate, and to lay claim to the crown. Jugurtha, though at Rome, and in the power of those who were likely to resent his crimes, gave a specimen of the bold and sanguinary counsels to which he was inclined, employed againfi this competitor the ordinary arts of his court, and had him alaflinated. The crime was traced to its author, but the fafe-conduct he had received could not be violated; and he was only commanded, without delay, to depart from Italy. On this occasion he left Rome with that me-
morable o morable faying;  Here is a city to be fold, if any"
"`,i- buyer could be found.   643. The Consul Albinus soon followed Jugurtha, to  . i.- take the command of the Roman army in Africa; oC:I.;; and being eager to perform some notable action lbis . before the expiration of his year, which was fast"
"approaching, he urged the king of Numidia, with all the forces he could assemble in the province; but found that he had to do with an enemy who had the art to elude his impetuosity, and from whose apparent conduct no judgment could be formed of his real designs. This artful warrior often advanced with a teeming intention to hazard a battle, when he was most resolved to decline it; or he precipitantly fled, when he meant to return upon his enemy, and take advantage of any difor- der he might incur in a too eager pursuit. His of- sers of fubmiflion, or his threats, were equally fal- lacious; and he used, perhaps in common with other African .princes, means to mislead his enemy, which Europeans, ancient as well as modern, have in general condemned. He made solemn capitu- lations and treaties with a view to break them, and confidered breach of faith, like a feint or an am- bush, as a stratagem licenced in war. The Euro- peans have always termed it perfidy to break the faith of a treaty, the Africans held it flupidity to be caught in the snare."
"By the artifices of Jugurtha accordingly, or by the remiflnefs of his antagoniit, the war was traEed for another year, and the Consul, as the time of the election drew near, was recalled, as ufil- al, to preside in the choice of his successor. At his arrival the city was in great agitation. The cry of corruption, which had been raised against many of the Nobles, on account of their supposed corref- pondence with jugurtha, gave an advantage to the popular party, and they determined to improve it, by raifir profect':ions to the rin of persons, either"
"odiouti"
"odious to the People, or obnoxious to the Equefiri A  an order, who then had the power of judicature in a_ their hands . Three inquisitors were accord- ingly named by special commiflion to take cogni- zance of all complaints of corruption that (hould be brought before them; and this commifion was inflantly employed to harass the Nobility, and to revenge the blood which had been shed in the late popular tumults. Lucius Calpurnius, Pifo, Befiia,  Cato, Spurius Albinus, and  Opimius, all of consular dignity, fell a sacrifice on this occasion to the popular resentment. The Tribune Mamilius, upon whose motion this tribunal had been ereted, with his associates, apprehending that, upon the ex- piration of their trust, the heat of the prosecutions might abate, moved the People that they might be continued in their office; and, upon finding them- selves opposed by the influence of the Senate and all the ordinary powers of the State, they suspend-  by virtue of their tribunitian power, the election of Consuls, and for a whole year kept the republic in a state of absolute anarchy."
"In this interval Aulus Albinus, left by his bro- ther, the late Consul, in the command of the army in Africa, determined to improve the occasion by some honourable a&ion. He left his quarters in the winter, and marched far into the country, hop- that by force or furprize he might possess him- self of the Numidian treasures or magazines. Ju- gurtha encouraged him in this design, affected fear, retired with precipitation wherever the Romans presented themselves; and, to encreafe the fumption of their general, rent frequent meflages to implore his pity. He at the fame time endea- voured to open a correspondence with the Thraci- ans and other foreigners, then serving in the Roman camp. Some of these he corrupted; and, when he"
"k() Cicero Clir; Oratribus. Saluit. in Bell. Jugurth."
"had"
"B o xhad drawn the Roman army into difficult situations,"
". and prepared his plan for execution, he suddenly"
"advanced in the night to the Roman station; and the avenues being entrufied, as he expected, to the Thracians and Ligurians whom he had corrupted, and by whom he was suffered to pass, he fur- prifed the Romans in. their camp, and drove them from thence in great confusion to a neigh- bouring height, where they enjoyed, during night, some retpite from the enemy; but without any source for fibfifence, or hopes of recovering their baggage."
"In the morning jugurtha desired to confer with the Praetor; and representing how much the Ro- mans, firipped of their provision and equipage, were then in his power, made a merit of offering them quarter,on condition that they would concludeatrea- ty of peace, and in ten days evacuate his kingdom."
"These terms were accordingly accepted: but the capitulation, when krfown at Rome, gave occa- sion to much indignation and clamour. It was voted by the Senate not to be binding, and the Consul Albinus, in order to repair the loss of the Public, and to restore the credit of his own family, made hasty levies, ith wlhich he proposed to renew the ar in Numidia. But not having the consent of the Tribunes to this measure, he was obliged to leave his forces behind him in Italy, and joined the army ithout being able to bring any reinforcement. He fcund it in no condition to face the enemy, and was ntented to remaiin the province till a fuc- cefl inould be named.  -. !6 'erntment of the disgraces incurred in Africa,"
".... ' .and se; of in:-afion from the Cimbri, who, having  -- '-, trave'-! -1d Spaiin and Gaul, were fill on their march, ', .... appe-: to have calmed for a little time the animosity"
"or    faOtions at Rome. The consular elec- tions .-crec iffered to proceed, and the choice of : People fell on Quintus Cecilius Metellus and"
"M. Junius"
"IM. Junius Silanus; the firit was appointed to thec A  command of the army in Numidia, the second to I observe the motions of the Cimbri on the frontiers of Gaul, and to turn them aside, if poflible, from the territory of Rome. About this time those wandering nations had sent a formal message to the Romans, desiring to have it underitood on what lands they might fettle  , or rather, over what lands they might pass in migration with their herds. This request being refused by the Se- nate, they opened a paifage by force, overcame in battle the Consul Silanus, and, probably with- out intending to retain any conquelt, continued to move wherever the aspect of the country tempt- their choice."
"Metellus proceeded to Africa with a confidera- ble reinforcement; and,, having spent some time in relloring the discipline of the army, which had been greatly neglected, and in training his new klvies to the duties and hardships of the service, he direced his march to the enemy country, and in his way had frequent messages from Jugurtha, with profeflions of submission and of a pacific position."
"When the Roman army entered on the terri- tory of Numidia, they accordingly found the coun- try prepared to receive them in a friendly manner; the people in tranquillity, the gates of every city left open, and the markets ready to supply them with necessaries."
"These appearances, with the known character of Jugurtha, creating diftrull, only excited the vigi- lance of Metellus. They even provoked him to retort on the Numidian his own insidious arts. He tampered with Bomilcar and the other mef- lengers of Jugurtha to betray their master, and promised them great rewards if they would"
"  Floius,  iii.   Ixv."
"deliver"
"B o deliver him into the hands of the Romans either '  living or dead."
"Jugurtha, not confidering that his known cha- raAer for falsehood must have destroyed the credit of all his professions, even if he should at any time think proper to make them sincere, and trufling to the effect of his submissive messages in rendering the enemy secure, made a disposition to profit by any errors they should commit, and hoped to cir- cumvent and destroy them on their march. For this purpose he waited for them on the descents of a high mountain, over which they were to pass in their way to the Muthul, a river which helped to form the situation of which he was to avail himself. He accordingly lay concealed by its banks until the enemy actually fell into the snare he had laid for them. With the advantage of the ground and of numbers, he maintained, during the greater part of the day, a contell with troops who posses- fed, against his irregulars, a great superiority of order, discipline, and courage; but not having found the Romans, as he expeced, in any degree off their guard, he was, in the event of that day action, obliged to fly with a few horse to a remote part of his kingdom."
"This victory obtained over Jugurtha, appeared to be an end of the war. His army was dispersed, and he was left with a few horse- men, who attend- his person, to find a place of retreat, and to chute a flation at which to assemble new forces, if he meant to continue the war."
"The Numidians were inured to action. The. frequent wars of that continent, the wild and unset- tied state of their own country, made the use of horses and of arms familiar: but so void was the nation of military policy, and its people so igno. rant of order, that it was scarcely possible for the king to fight two battles with the fame army. If victorious, they withdrew with their plunder; if"
"defeated,"
"defeated, they supposed all military obligationsc A  at an end: and in either cafe, after an action,  every one fled where he expe to be soonest in' - safety."
"Metellus, after the late engagement, finding no enemy in the field, was for some time uncertain to what part of the kingdom Jugurtha had dirented his flight. But having intelligence that he was in a new situation assembling an army, and likely to form one still more numerous than any he had yet brought into the field, tired of pursuing an enemy on whom defeats had so little effet, he turned away to the richer and more cultivated parts of the king- dom. Here the plunder of the country might better repay his labour, and the enemy, if he ven- tured to defend his territory, might more sensibly feel his defeats. Jugurtha perceiving his intention, drew his forces towards the fame quarter, and soon appeared in his rear."
"While Metellus was endeavouring to force the city of Zama, Tugurtha pierced into his camp, and, though repulsed from thence, took a post, by which he made the situation of the Romans, tween the town and his own army, so uneasy, as to oblige them to raise the siege.."
"This the Numidian prince thought a proper op- portunity to gain some credit to his pacific profeffi- ons. He made an offer accordingly to surrender at discretion, and actually delivered up great part of his arms and military stores; but this purpose, if ever sincere, he retracted, and again had recourse to arms."
"The victory which had been obtained in Africa, .  641. flattered the vanity of the Roman People, and 'ivus~, - procured to Metellus in the quality of Proconsul, ba, QHor- a continuation of his former command. Thepo^MN  troops he had poRed in Vaca being cut off by theAurelius inhabitants, he made hafiy marches in the night,scaurus. surprised the place, and, without having allowed"
"VOL. I. b the"
"B the authors of that outrage more than two days"
"XI to enjoy the fruits of their perfidy, amply  ' venged the wrong they had done to the Roman
garrison.
But the success of Metellus did not haften the ruin of Jugurtha so fait as his own mifcondudt, in the jealousy and sanguinary measures which he took to suppress plots and conspiracies, either real or supposed to be formed against his life, by persons the mofi in his confidence.
Bomilcar, fiill carrying in his mind the offers which had been made by Metellus, and willing to have some merit with the Romans,into whose hands he and all the fubjeds of Jugurtha were likely soon to fall, formed a design against his master, and drew Nabdalfa, a principal officer in the Nu- midian armies, to take part in the plot. They were discovered in time to prevent the execution of their design, but they made Jugurtha from thenceforward confider the camp of his own army as a place of danger to himself, rendered him truiiful, timorous, and unquiet; frequently chang- his company and his quarters, his guards and his bed. Under there apprehensions, by which his mind was considerably disordered and weakened, he endeavoured, by continual and rapid motions, to make it uncertain where he should be found; and he experienced at last, that private assassination and breach of faith, although they appear to abridge the toils of ambition, are not expedient even in war; that they render human life itself, for the advantages of which war was undertaken, no longer eligible or worthy of being preserved. Weary of his anxious slate, he ventured once more to face Metellus in the field, and being again defeated, fled to Thala, where he had left his chil- dren and the moil valuable part of his treasure. This city too, finding Metellus had followed him, he was obliged to abandon, and, with his children
and
and his remaining effects, fled from Numidia, first A to the country of the Getuli, barbarous nations,  that lived among the mountains of Atlas south of Numidia, and whom he endeavoured to arm in his cause. From thence he fled to Bocchus king of Mauritania, whose daughter he had married; and having persuaded this prince to confider his quar- rel with the Romans as the common cause of all monarchies, who were likely in fucceflion to come the prey of this arrogant and insatiable power, he prevailed on the Mauritanian to assemble his army, and to attempt the relief of Numidia. Jugartha, in conjunction with his new alley, directed his march to Cirta, and Metellus perceiv- his intention, took potl to cover that place. But while he was endeavouring, by threats or persuasions, to detach the king of Mauritania from Jugurtha, he received information from Rome' that he was superseded in the command of the army; and from thenceforward protracted the war, un- der pretence of messages and negociations, and possibly inclined to leave it with all its difficulties entire to his successor. Marius, having served under Metellus, had with great difficulty, and not without some expressions of scorn on the part of his general, obtained leave to depart for Rome, where he meant to fland for the Consulship. He accordingly appeared in the capacity of candidate for this honour, and by vaunting, inflead of concealing, the obscurity of his ancestors; by inveighing againfl the whole or- der of Nobility, their dress, their city manners, their Greek learning, their family images, the stress they laid on the virtue of their forefathers to penfate the want of it in themselves; but more especially by arraigning the dilatory conduct of Metellus, and by promising a speedy issue to the war, if it should be entrusted to himself; a mise, to which the force and ability he had shown
Bb in O Kin all the stations he had hitherto filled, procured \_^ him some credit; he so far won upon the People,
that he was chosen consul, in opposition to the in. terest of the Nobles, and to the influence of all the leading men of the Senate. His promotion was in a particular manner galling to Metellus, whose putation he had attacked, and to whose fiation in Africa, by an express order of the People, in tempt of the arrangement which had been made by the Senate, he was now to succeed.   6_.. Upon the nomination of Marius, the party who  c2i had opposed his preferment did not attempt to  Mins. withhold the reinforcements which he asked for the"
"'service in which he was to command. They even hoped to encreafe his difficulties by suffering him to increase the establishment of his province. The wealthier class of the People alone were yet  mitted into the legions; and being averse to such distant services, were likely to conceive a dislike to the persons by whom they were forced to inlifi. Marius in this capacity might lose some part of the popular favour which he now enjoyed, and become less formidable to his rivals in the State. But this crafty and daring politician, by flighting the laws which excluded the necessitous citizens from serving in the legions, found in this class of the People a numerous and willing supply. They crowded to his fiandard, and filled up his army without delay, and even without offence to thole of a better dition, who were pleated with relief from this part of their public burdens."
"This was a remarkable and dangerous innova- in the Roman State, and may be mentioned among the steps which hafiened the ruin of the monwealth. From this time forward the sword gan to pass from the hands of those who were inter- efied in the preservation of the republic,into the hands of others who were willing to make it a prey. The circumstances of the times were such, indeed, as to give warning of the change. The service of"
"a legionary"
"a legionary soldier was become too severe for the lefsc A  indigent order of citizens, and now opened to the ne-  cefitous the principal road to profit, as wellas ho- nour. Marius, to facilitate his levies, was willing to gratify both; and thus gave beginning to the forma- of armies who were ready to fight for or against the laws of their country, and who, in the sequel, substituted battles for the bloodless contests which hitherto had arisen from the divisions of party."
"The new consul, unrivalled in the favour of the People, obtained whatever he required, and, being completely provided for the service to which he was defined, embarked for Africa with a great reinforcement, and in a few days arrived at Utica. Upon his atrival, the operations of the war were retumed, and carried into the wealthiest provinces of Numidia, where he encouraged his army with the hopes of spoil. The new levies, though posed of persons hitherto excluded from the military er-vice, were formed by the example of the legions al:-idy in the field, and who were now well ap- prifed of their own superiority to the African ar- mies. Bocchus and Jugurtha, upon the approach of this enemy, thought proper to separate, and took different routes into places of safety in the more difficult and inaccefible parts of the coun- try."
"This reparation was made at the suggestion of Jugurtha, who alleged that, upon their appearing to despair, and to discontinue all offensive opera- tions, the Roman general would become more fe- cure, and more open to surprise. But Marius, without abating his vigilance, pressed where the enemy gave way, over-ran the country, and took poffeflion of the towns they had left. To rival the glory which Metellus had gained in the redution of Thala, he ventured on a like enterprise, in the face of similar difficulties, by attacking Thapfa, a place Surrounded with defarts, and in the midst of"
"a land"
"B o a land destitute of water, and of every resource"
"for an army. Having succeeded in this design, he ventured, in his return, to attack another fortress, in which, it being supposed impregnable, the royal treasures were lodged. This strong hold was situ- ated on a rock, which was every where, except at one path that was fortified with ramparts and tow- ers, faced with fieep and inacceflible cliffs. The garrison permitted the firit approaches of the Ro- mans with perfect security, and even derision. After some fruitless attacks, Marius with some im- putation of folly in having made the attempt, was about to desist from the enterprise, when a Ligu- rian, who had been used to pick snails on the cliffs over which this fortress was situated, found himself in search of his prey, and by the growing facility of the ascent, led to a height from which he began to have hopes of reaching the summit. He accord- ingly surmounted all the difficulties in his way; and the garrison being then intent on the opposite of the fortress to which the attack was directed, he returned unobserved. This intelligence he carried to Marius, who without delay ordered a detach- ment of chosen men, with an unusual number of trumpets and instruments of alarm, to follow the direction of this guide. He himself, to divert the attention of the besieged, and to be ready, on ceiving the proposed signal from within, to make a vigorous and decisive assault, advanced to the walls. The Ligurian, with much difficulty, en- deavoured to effect his intentions. The soldiers who followed him were obliged to untie their fan- dais and their helmets, to fling their shields and their swords, and, at difficult parts of the rock, could not be persuaded to advance until their guide had repeatedly passed and repassed in their fight, or had found flumps and points of the flone at which they could fallen cords to aid their ascent. The summit was to he gained at last by the branches of"
"a tree"
"a tree which, being rooted in a cleft of the rock A  grew up to the edge of the precipice. By the  branches of this tree the whole party passed, and, ' climbing near to its top, landed at last on the fum- mit. They inltantly founded their trumpets and gave a sudden alarm. The besieged, who had been drawn to the walls to resist the enemy who attacked them in front, were aitonifhed with this found in their rear, and soon after, greatly terrified with the confused flight from behind them of wo- men, children, and men unarmed, and being at the fame time vigorously attacked at their gates, were no longer able to resist, suffered the Romans to force their way at this entrance, and in the end to become mailers of the fort.
While Marius was engaged in the siege of this place he was joined by the QeRftor Sylla, who had been left in Italy to bring up the cavalry, which were not ready to embark at the departure of the Consul. This young man was of a patrician and noble family, but which had not, for some gene- rations, borne any of the higher offices of State. He himself partook in the learning which then spread into Italy, from a communication with the Greeks, and had paired the early part of his life in town dillipation or in literary fiudies, of which the last were confidered at this time at Rome as a fpe- cies of corruption almost equal to the first. He was yet a novice in war, but having an enterprifl genius, soon became an objet of respect to the soldiers, and of jealousy to his general, with whom he now laid the foundation of a quarrel more fatal to the commonwealth than that which had subsisted between the present and preceding commander in this service.
The king of Numidia, flung by the sense of what he had already loft, and expetding no advan- tage from any further delays, determined, in junction with Bocchus, to make a vigorous effort,
and oK and to oblige Marius, who was then moving to his
winter quarters, yet to hazard a battle for the servation of what he had acquired in the preceding campaign. The king of Mauritania had been clined to remain neutral, or to enter on a separate treaty with the Romans; but being promifcda third part of the kingdom of Numidia, in cafe the Ro- mans were expelled from thence, and the war should be brought to a happy conclusion, he once more brought forward his army, and joined Ju- gurtha.
The prosperous fiate of the Romans, undifturb- for forne time by the opposition of any enemy in the field, inspired them with some degree of negligence or security, by which they were ex- posed to surprise. About an hour before the setting of the fun, their march was interrupted by the at- tack of numerous parties, who, without any fettled order, occupied the fields through which they were to pass, and seemed to intend, by assailing them on every  to begin the night with a scene of confusion, of which they might afterwards more effettually avail themselves in the dark. In an action begun under there disadvantages, it was sup- posed, that the Roman army might be entirely defeated, and in a country with which they were not acquainted, and in circumfiances for which they were not at all pr-pared, being unable to es- a retreat, surrender at discretion.
Jugurtha, with his usual intrepidity and conduct, profited by every circumtlance which presented it- self in his favour. He brought the troops,-of which his army was composed, whether Getulians or Nu- midians, horse or foot, to harass the enemy in their different ways of fighting, and where they could easiest make their attacks. Wherever a party was repulted, he took care to replace it; and some- times affected to remit his ardour, or to fly with every appearance of panic, in order to tempt the
Romans
Romans to break from their ranks. Marius, not- A  withilanding, with great dexterity and presence of  mind, maintained the form of his march; and, before night, got poffeilion of some heights on which he could secure his army. He himself, with the infantry, chore that which had the fleepeft as- cent, and ordered Sylla, with the cavalry, to take his poll on a smaller eminence below. That his position might not be known to the enemy, he hibited the lighting of fires, and the usual founding of trumpets at the different watches of the night. The Numidians had halted on the plain where night overtook them, and were observed, at break of day, reposing in great security, and with- out any seeming apprehension of danger from an enemy, who was fippofed to be flying, and who, on the preceding day, had, with some difficulty, escaped from their hands. Marius resolved to at- tack them in this situation, and gave orders, which were communicated through the army, that, at a general found of the trumpets, evere man should fiand to his arms, and with a great shout, and beating on his shield, make an impetuous attack on the enemy. The design, accordingly, succeed-  The Numidians, who had often affected to fly, were driven into an adtual rout. Great num- bers fell in the flight, and many ensigns and tro- phies were taken.
After this victory, Marius, with his usual cautions, and without remitting his vigilance, on a supposition that the enemy was dispersed, direat- his march to the towns on the coast, where he intended to fix his quarters for the winter. Ju- gurtha, well apprised of his route, proposed again to surprise him before he should reach the end of his journey; and, for this purpose, avoided giving him any premature or unnecessary cause of alarm, He prepared to attack the Roman army in the neighbourhood of Cirta, which was to be the end
of o sos their labours, and near to which he supposed
- that they would think themselves secure from any ''fu urther attempts of their enemy. In the execution"
"of this design, he, with the greatef ability, ducted his troops to the place of action, and there too made every effort of condut and resolution. But the match being unequal, he was obliged to give up the contest; and, with his sword and his armour all bathed in blood, and almost alone, is said to have left a field, in which, for the first time, he had taken no precautions for re-affem- bling his army, and on which his Numidians were accordingly routed, to rally no more!   647. Upon there repeated defeats, Bocchus despaired Scr .',. of the fortunes of Jugurtha, and sent a deputation"
"t - to Mlarius, requesting a conference with himself, or -.. wxith some of his officers. He obtained an inter-"
"view with Sylla and Manlius; but, upon their ar- rival, had taken no fixed resolution, and was still kept in furpence, by the persuasion of those of his court who favoured the interest of Jugurtha. Ma- rius, being continued in his command, resumed the operations of the war, and was about to attack the only place which yet remained in the hands of the enemy. When the king of Mauritania, alarm- by this circumliance, took his resolution to sue for peace, he ient a deputation of five chosen per- sons, firlt to the quarters of Marius, and, with this general permilion, ordered them to proceed from thence to Rome. These deputies, being admitted into the Senate, made offers of friendship in the name of their marter; and were informed, in turn, that he mutt give proofs of his friendly position to the Romans, before they could believe his profellions, or liiten to any terms of peace. When this answer was reported to Bocchus, he was not at a lots to underfhand that the Romans wished him to deliver up the king of Numidia into their hands; and teems to have conceived the "
"'sign"
"'sign of purchasing peace, even on there terms. A  Sylla being already personally known to him, he  made choice of this officer, as the person with whom he would treat, and desired he might be sent to his quarters. The Roman Q aeftor accord- ingly set out with a small party. On the way he was met by Volux, the son of the king of Maurita- nia, with a thousand horse: him he confidered as of doubtful intention, whether come as a friend or an enemy; but coming with profeflions of fiiend- ship from the king his father, and with orders to escort the Roman Qusftor, they proceeded toge- ther. On the lecond day after this juntion, Vo- lux came in haste to the quarters of Sylla, and formed him, that the advanced party had disco- vered Jugurtha poRted on their route, with a fiderable foice, and earnefily prefed the Romans to endeavour to make their etcape in the night."
"Sylla could no longer command his fu!picions, and, sensible that he had imprudently, without hostage or other security, ventured too far on the faith of an African prince, proudly refuled to alter his march; desired that the Mauritanian prince, if he thought proper, should depart; but informing him, at the fame time, that the Roman people would know how to revenge the injury done to their officers, and would not fail to punilh the per- fidy of the king his father. Volux made protelia- tions of his innocence; and as the Roman Q:aetior could not be prevailed on to save himself by flight, this prince inlifted to remain, and to flare in his danger. They accordingly kept on their way, passed through the troops of Jugurtha, who, though disposed to offer violence to the Romans, had yet some measures to observe with the king of Mauritania, whose son was in the company; and while, contrary to his usual character, he remained undecided, the prey escaped him, and got out of his reach."
"Jugurtha"
"B Jugurtha sent persons of confidence immediately"
"to counteract the negotiations of Sylla at the court of Bocchus; and each of these parties solicited the king of Mauritania to betray the other. The Nu- midians endeavoured to persuade him, that, with such an hotiage as Sylia in his hands, he might flill expect obme honourable terms from the Romans; and Syila, on the other part, represented, that, as the king of Mauritania had offended the Ro- mans, by abetting the crimes of Jugurtha, he must now expiate his guilt by delivering him over to juflice. It was the inclination of this prince to favour Jugurtha; but it was his interest, as well as his intention, to gain the Romans. While he was fiill in futpence, he gave equal encouragement to both parties; and, without being finally determin- what he flould do, appointed the Roman Quieflir and the king of Numidia to meet him wi:hout any escort, or number of men in arms, serving to the last moment the power of determin- against the one or the other. He had placed a body of his own troops in ambush, and, soon after the parties were met, gave a signal, which his men understood to be for seizing Jugurtha. The Numidians, who attended their king, were lain; he himself was put in chains, and delivered up to the Roman Q2axftor. Sylla, with the exul- tation of a hunter, received this lion in his toils; and, though he lived to perform much greater ac- tions, fill appears to have valued mfelf motl on the success of this commission. He boasted so much of his prize, that he became, from that mo- ment, an objec of jealousy to Marius, and was confidered as a person advancing too fast in the fame career of renown (i). It was understood among the Romans, that the commander in chief, upon any service, in any division or province of"
"(;) Plutarch. in M2rio & in Syllb."
"the"
"the empire, enjoyed the triumph for viCtoriesc A  gained, even in his absence, by his lieutenants, or   by those who served under his command; and Marius probably thought that Sylla took more to himself than was due upon this occasion. The  fire of being the person who put the finishing hand to any service, however accomplilhed, was not peculiar to these officers. It was an effect of the Roman policy in maling the rewards of honour depend so much on events, without regard to the means which were employed to produce them. From this circumstance, the citizens of this repub- lic were as desirous of having the reputation of fuc- cefsful adventures affixed to their names, as cour- tiers in modern Europe are desirous to have titles of nobility, or badges of their sovereign fa- vour."
"The war being thus at an end, Marius appoint- a thanksgiving; and, while he was offering the customary sacrifices, the news arrived from Rome that the People had dispensed with the law in his favour, and again had made choice of him for ful of the following year. This choice was deter- mined by the great alarm which the Romans had taken on the approach of the barbarous nations, who, like a meteor, had, for some years, traversed the regions of Europe, and, with uncertain direc-  were said to destroy wherever they moved. The Romans had repeatedly flood in their way, and had provoked a resentment, which these bar- barians were supposed, in haste, to wreck upon Italy. They were at first heard of under the name only of Cimbri; but were now known to consist of many nations, under the appellations of Am- brones, Teutones, Teetofagi, and others; and had gained acceflions of force by the junction of the Tigurini, and other Gaulilh nations, who, either by choice or compulsion, were made a part in this"
"mighty"
"E O mighty host, whose movements the Romans con-"
"- fidered as chiefly directed againil themselves. '.  4' Besides the armies commanded by the Consuls  :cilaCarbo and Silanus, who had fallen victims to this  .: barbarous enemy, other considerable bodies, under"
"Scaurus and Cailius, had perished by their hands; and other misfortunes, from the fame quarter, were coming apace. At the time that Marius had finithed the war with Jugurtha, Qtintus Servius Cepio, having the former year - commanded in Gaul, where he destroyed or pillaged the city of Toiofa, and made a great booty, confifing, ac- cording to Juftin, of one hundred thousand pounds weight of gold, and one million five hundred thou- sand pounds weight of silver, was now, in his turn, to meet with this enemy; the Consul Mallius or Manilius had orders to join him; and all the troops they could aflemble were thought necessary to withstand the Barbarians. These generals united their forces on the Rhone, but without a proper disposition to aft in concert; they were according- ly defeated in battle; eighty thousand Romans, amongit whom were the two sons of the Consul Manilius, were killed in the action; forty thou- sand attendants of the army were maflacred in cold blood. Both camps were taken."
"After this victory the lords of the Cimbri, being assembled in council, called before them Aurelius Scaurus, formerly a Roman Consul, lately second in command to one of the vanquished armies, and now a prisoner. They questioned him with refped to the forces in Italy, and the route to be taken across the Alps: To there questions he made an- fwer, That it would be in vain for them to invade that country; That the Romans, on their own ter- ritory. were invincible. And, in return to these words, it is said, that a Barbarian firuck the pri- soner with his dagger to the heart. It is further said of this barbarous council, that they came to a"
"resolution"
"resolution to spare no prisoners, to destroy the A  spoils of the slain, to cast all the treasures of gold rv. and silver into the nearest river, to destroy all' horses with their saddles and furniture, and to save no booty whatever; and it mufft be confessed, that in this their resolutions were guided by a policy well accommodated to the manner of'life they chore to maintain. Wealthy poffeflions frequently disqualify even fettled nations for the toils of war, but to migrating tribes, they would be certain im- pediments and the means of ruin  ."
"These accounts of the character of an enemy, and of the fate of Roman armies which ventured to encounter them, were received at Rome with amazement and terror. The citizens changed their dress, and assumed the military habit. Ru- tilius, the Consul, who had remained in the admi- nifiration of affairs in Italy, had infirudions from the Senate to array every person that was fit to bear-arms. No one who had attained the military age was exempted. It is mentioned, that the son of the Consul himself was turned into the ranks of a legion. There was little time to train such le- vies; and the usual way was thought insufficient. The fencing-mafters, employed to train gladiators for the public shews, were brought forth, and tributed to inliru the citizens in the use of their weapons (1). But the expedient, on which the People chiefly relied for deliverance from the dan- gers which threatened them, was the nomina- of Marius to command against this terrible enemy. ; This officer, upon hearing of his re-eletion, set out for Italy, and, with his legions and their cap- tives, entered Rome in triumph; a spectacle, of which Jugurtha, in chains, with his unfortunate"
"(i) Orofius,    16. Eutrop.   (I) Valer. Max.    3."
"children,"
"B o Kchildren, were the principal figures. When the"
"IL IL_ ,procession was over, the captive king was led to a"
"dungeon, under orders for his immediate execu-  As he was about to be itripped of his orna- ments and robes, the executioner, in halle to pluck the pendants from his ears, tore away the flesh, and thruRt him naked into a dungeon below ground. He descended into this place with a smile, faying,  What a cold bath is here! He pined about fix days, and expired. A king and an able commander would, in such a situation, have been an objet of refpe& and of pity, if we did not recollet, that he was the murderer of  herbal and Hiempfal, the innocent children of his benefactor. And if we did not receive some folation from being told, that his own children, who were likewise innocent, were exempted from the lot of their father, and honourably entertained in Italy."
"Marius, in this triumph, is said to have brought into the treasury three thousand and seven pounds, or thirty thousand and seventy ounces of gold, and fifty-feven thousand seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver; and in money, two hundred and eighty- seven thousand denarii  . He entered the Se- nate, contrary to custom, in his triumphal robes, probably to insult the Nobles, who used to despise him as a person of obscure extraction, born in a country town, and of a mean family: but finding that this was confidered as an a& of petulance, and generally condemned, he withdrew and changed his dress."
"The kingdom of Numidia was dismembered; part was put into the possession of Bocchus as a ward for his late services; and part reserved for the surviving heirs of Massinissa."
"(mrJ) About lo,ocoL"
"As"
"As the law respecting the Consulate now flood, A  no one could be elected in absence, nor re-elected '. into this office, till after an interval of ten years.  . 649. Both clauses were dispensed with in favour of Ma-' on0uls rius, under pretence of continuing him at the head  Flavius of the army; but as he might fiill have remainedFimb' at the head of the army, and have rendered the fame services to the State in the quality of Procon- ful, his re-election may be ascribed to his own am- bition, and to his jealousy of other rising men in the State. Being confidered as head of the popu- lar party, his elevation was an objeCt of zeal to the Tribunes, and was intended to mortify those who affeced the distinctions of andeni farr.  trary to the usual form, and wirtiout casting lots, he was preferred to his colleague in the appoint- ment to command in Gaul. Having his choice of all the armies at that timc in Italy, he took the new levies, lately a;i.crm-.:a and disciplined by Rutiiius, in preference to the veterans, who ; served in Africa under Metellus and himtl fs It is probable that he was determined in ibis choice, more by his desire to gratify the vzteran, wvho wished to be discharged, than by the confideratiun of any supposed superiority in the discipline to which the new levies had been trained  ."
"Upon the arrival of Marius in his province it appeared, that the alarm taken for the safety of Italy was somewhat premature. The Barbarians in their battles only meant to maintain the reputa- of their valour, or to keep open the tract of their migrations. They had found the lands, from about the higher parts of the Danube and the Rhine, through Gaul, and across the Pyrennees into Spain, and to the ocean, convenient for their purpose, and sufficiently extensive. They had yet meditated no war with the Romans, or any"
"  Frontius Stragcm3t.    3,  I. c other"
"B o other nation; but did not decline the encounter"
"where they met with resistance. At present they continued their migrations to the westward, with- out any intention to cross the Alps, or to visit the nations who inhabited within those mountains."
"We have nothing recorded in history concerning the movements of these wandering nations, during the two subsequent years, except what is related of their adventure with Fulvius, a Roman Pretor, probably in Spain, who, in return for hostilities committed in his province, having made a feint to draw the attention of their warriors, surprised and sacked their camp. Under the apprehension, how- ever, of their return towards Gaul and Italy, Ma- rius continued to be elected Consul, and was peatedly named to the command of the army that was destined to oppose them. His party at Rome had, at this time, betides the exigency which jus- tified their choice, many other advantages against their antagonists, and maintained the envious quar- rel of the lower people against the nobility with great animosity and zeal."
"C A ."
"CH AP.  Review of the CircumflJances which revived the popu- lar party.-Farther Account of Laws and Regula- tions under their Admini/iration.-State of the Em- pire.-Fourth Confllale of Maarius.-Continued Migrations of the barbarous Nations.-Defeated by Marius at Aique Sextie.-By Marius and Catulus in Italy."
"H Senate had, for some time after thee A  suppression of the troubles which were raised _- by Fulvius and the younger Gracchus, retained its authority, and refrained the Tribunes of the Peo- ple within ordinary bounds; but by the fifpicions which arose against them, on the subject of their trar.factions with Jugurtha, and by the miscarriages of the war in Numidia, they again loft their  vantage. It is difficult to ascertain the real grounds of these suspicions. Sallust seems to admit them in their utmost extent, and represents the whole order of nobility as mercenary traders, disposed to fell what the republic entrulted to their hpnour. That the presents of Jugurtha were sometimes ac- cepted, and produced some effet, is not to be doubted; but that the arifiocracy of Rome, during its Ihort reign, was so much corrupted, is scarcely to be credited. Such a measure of corruption must have rendered the State a prey to every foreign power that was in condition to mislead its councils, and is not confifient with that superiority which the Romans .then generally poffefled in their negotia- tions, as well as in their wars. The charge itself favours too much of that envy with which the lower class of the People at all times interpret the con-"
"Cc 2 dun"
", Ko duc of their superiors, and which was greatly"
"c. ountenanced by the partisans of Cafar, at the time when Sallust wrote, in order to vilify and duce the Senate. We cannot, however, oppose mere conjecture to the positive testimony of Sallut, corroborated by some suspicious circumstances in the tranfations of the times. Among these we may recollect the patronage which Jugurtha met with at Rome, contrary to the profeflions of the Romans, in behalf of justice, and the uncommon number of Senators degraded, at that time, by au- thoritv of the Censors, Q. Cacilius Metellus and Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus (a), which has been already mentioned in its place."
"Whatever may have been the real occasion of the cry then subsisting againit the Nobles, we have seen that the popular party, availing themselves of it, and giving it all manner of countenance, found means to recover great part of their loil power. The Tribunes, having obtained the establishment of a special cormiflion for the trial of all those who had received bribes from Jugurtha, made the peo- ple confider their own  in constituting a court of inquiry, as sufficient to evince the reality of the crime. The prosecutions which continued to be carried on for two years, upon this supposition, served more than the subje of any former ditpute to alienate the minds of men from each other, and from the public. Quefiions were more of a pri- vate than of a public nature, and occupied the worst of the human paflions, envy, malice, and revenge. One party learned to cherish falsehood, subordination, and perjury; the other lived in tinuai fear of having such engines employed againti them selves."
"The People, in their zeal to attack the Nobility under any pretence, made no diftintion between (.)  is alic:dy rent:cn  that thirty-two Senators were lnruck  they :uil, by thcrC mn.itate.error"
"errors"
"errors and crimes; and, contrary to the noble spi A  rit of their anceflors, treated misfortune, incapa-  city, or treachery, with equal rigour. One Tri-- -' bune had extended the use of the secret ballot to the trial oflelter crimes   ; another, upon this oc- cafion, took away all diftintions, and introduced it in the trial of capital crimes allb  ; so that the judge, without being accountable, indulged his fe- cret malice or partial favour  .
Laws were made to promote the interell, as well as to gratify the animosity of the lower peo- ple. By the Agrarian law of Gracchus, certain li- mits were set to efiates in land; but, in order to render the excess of lands, in the hands of any par- ticular person, immediately useful to the People, it was permitted, by an amendment made during the low slate of the ariftocratical party, that per- sons in possession of more than the legal measure of land, might retain their estates, but fubjeat to a rent to :be collected for the benefit of the poorer citizens; and thus it was proposed, that without any trouble in taking poffeflion of lands, or moving from the city, the favourites of the party Lhould' be accommodated, and reap the fruits of sedition and idleness unimpaired  .
It was proposed, by the.Conful Servilius Capio   647. that the Senate, whose members were perfonallydcejuxse i, so much exposed to prosecutions, should have their Ihare likewise in composing the Juries, a privilege of which, by the edict of Gracchus, they had been deprived  . In whatever degree this proposal was adopted, it was again expressly repealed upon the motion of Servilius Glaucia. And Capio soon after experienced, in his own person, the animofi- ty of the popular faction, being tried for mifcar- riage in his battle with the Cimbri. He was   Lex Caflia Tabellaria.   Appian. Bell. Civ.  i.   Lex Cxlia Tabellaria.   Valer. Max.       Cicer. Legibus,  iii.
demned o demned by'the judges, and afterwards, in virtue
I. of a regulation obtained by Cassius, one of the Tri- ' bunes, declared, in consequence of that sentence,
dilqualified to hold a place in the Senate  .
Besides the tranfacions already mentioned, the following particulars, overlooked in the hurry of recording military operations and events, may serve still farther to characterize the times.  Ju- nius Silanus was tried for mifcondua against the enemy;  Emilius Scaurus, first on the roll of the Senate, was brought to trial for contempt of religion; but both acquitted. The ardour'for these :prdfecutions and popular regulations, continued iuntil 'the second Consulate of Marius, when  Marcius Philippus, one of the Tribunes, moved to restore the law of Tiberius Gracchus respecting the division of estates in land; and, in his speech in support of this motion, affirmed, that:there were not two thousand families in Rome possessed of any perty in land whatever  . This motion, however, was withdrawn.
Among the crimes which the populace were now so eager-to punish, fortunately that of peculation or extortion in the provinces was one. To facili- tate complaints on this fubjeft, not only persons having an immediate interest in the cafe, but all to whom any money or effects injuriously taken miglht have otherwise come by inheritance, were intitled to prosecute for this offence; and any alien, who convited a Roman citizen of this crime, so as to have him fitruck off the 'rolls of the People, was himself to-be inrolled instead of the:citizen 'placed  .
:Domitius, one of the Tribunes, attacked the ariftocratical coritfitution even of the priefihood, and endeavoured to transfer the right of eletion
  Afconils Pdianus in Corneliana Ciceronis.   Cicr. Ofidis,     Cicero in:Balbiana.
from
from the order itself to the People; but fuperffiti- A  on, which continues to influence the bulk of man-  kind after reason has failed, here flood in his way. The cuflom was against him; and, in such matters, religion and .cuflom are the fame. The People, Lx Domi-
- .--~ ' ia Saccr- therefore, it was confessed, could not interferedotiis without profanation; but a certain part of the Peo- ple might judge of the candidates, and infiru& the college of .priests whom they were to chufe  . The fame artifice, or verbal evasion, had been al- ready admitted in the form of eleting the Pontifex Maximus, now chosen by seventeen of the Tribes who were drawn by lot (i)."
"*During this period, a just alarm was taken on the subjet of private as well as public corruption. Liberty was conceived to imply a freedom from every refiraint, and to justify licence and contempt .of the laws. The aids which were given to the People to.enable them to subsist in profusion and idleness; the wealth that was passing to Rome in the hands of traders, contrators, and farmers of .the revenue, as well as provincial officers, by whom the profits.of a first appointment were lavished in public {hews, fights of gladiators, and.baiting of wild beasts, to gain the People in their canvas for farther preferments; these several circumstances tended, in the highest degree, to corrupt the Peo- ple, and.to render them unworthy of that fove- reignty which they actually possessed in the preva- lence of the popular faction."
"The severities which were prafifed in certain .cafes, the sumptuary laws which were provided to restrain luxury, were but feeble aids to fiop such a source of disorder. It is mentioned, as an instance of such severity, that some vestals were questioned at this time for a breach of that sacred obligation"
"  Afconius in Corneliana Ciceronis. (i) Cicero Lege Agraria."
"tQ"
"B _ to chafritv, under which they were held up as a"
"u. -pat::rn of manners to the Roman women; that  :.- of them were condemned, and, together ith Roman knights, the supposed partners in their crimes, suffered extreme punishment. A temple was on this occasion ereeed to the goddess Venus under a new title, that of the Reformer  ; and prayers were to be offered up in this temple, that it might please the goddess to guard the chafti- ty of Roman women (1).
The term luxury is somewhat ambiguous; it is put for sensuality or excess in what relates to the preservation of animal life ; and for the effec of vanity, in what relates to the decorations of rank and fortune. The luxury of the Romans, in the present age, was probably of the former kind, and lumptuary laws were provided, not to restrain va- nity, but to govern the appetites for mere debauch. About the time that Jugurtha was at Rome, the sumptuary law of Fannius received an addition, by which Roman citizens were not only reftrited in their ordinary expence, but the legal quantities and species of food were prescribed to them. The whole expence of the table was restricted to thirty asses (;i;) a day, and the meat to be served up, to three or four pounds, dried or salted. There was no rerridion in the use of herbs or vegetables of any frt ( . According to A. Gellius, the law permitted, on certain days, an expence of an hun- dred alses; on wedding-days, two hundred. It is remarkable, that this law continued to have its effect on the tables of Roman citizens after Cicero was a man  . The Epicures of his time were obliged to make up, in the cookery of their
  Vcnu; Ve:ticordia. (i) ofiu;,    . Jul. Obfequenn. Ovid. Fall.   (~A) Abut ixwo hiliilngs. (,) Macrobius Satur.    17. :? Erpif. Fazmliar.   al Gallam.
vegetable
vegetable diet, what was defetive in that species of A  food. 
About the time of the commencement of the Numidian war, the People, according to the Cen- sus, amounted to four hundred and three thousand four hundred and thirty-fix citizens, fit to carry arms. At this time it was that the Censors, Quintus Cecilius Metellus, and Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, expelled thirty-two members from the Senate.
While the Romans were intent on the war which fubfifled in Africa, they were assailed by enemies in some of the other provinces. In Spain, hof- tilities, at intervals, were frill renewed. In endea- vouring to quell one of the revolts of the natives, the Roman Praetor was killed; in another encoun- ter, the forces employed against them were cut off; and a fresh army was transported from Italy, to fe- cure the Roman poifeflions.
Hoffilities were likewise continued on the fron. tier of Macedonia, by the Scordifci, Triballi, and other Thracian nations; and the Proconsul Rufus, by his victories in this quarter, obtained a triumph.
During this period, in the Consulship of Attilius Serranus, and Q. Servilius Capio, the year after the first Conlulfhip of Marius, were born two illus- trious citizens,  Tullius Cicero, and Cneius Pompeius Strabo, afterwards diflinguifhed by the appellation of Pompey the Great. And we are now to open the scene in which the persons, on whom the fate of the Roman empire was to depend, made their several entries into life, or into public business, and began to pass through an infancy or a youth of danger, to an old age of extreme trou- ble, which closed with the subversion of that confti- tution to which they were born.
Marius having, without any memorable event, ti ' passed the year of his second Consulship on ther;1i', 3,,,.
frontier,,."
"B o frontier of Narbonne Gaul, was, by the People,"
"fill under the tame apprehension of the Cimbric invasion, re-eleded into the fame office, and deftin. for his former station. This year likewise the Barbarians turned aside from his province, and left the republic at'leifure to contend with enemies of less consideration, who appeared in a different quarter. Athenio, a slave in Sicily, having mur- dered his mafier, and broken open the prisons or yards in which slaves were commonly confined at work, afiembled a number 1together, and being clothed in a purple robe, with a crown and a fcep- tre, affeced a species of royalty, -invited all the slaves of the island to assume their freedom under his protection. -He acquired sirength sufficient to cope with Servilius Caica, the 'Roman Prator, and actually forced him in his camp. He likewise  feated the succeeding Prator,Licinius Lucullus ; and was, in the third year of the'infurreetion, with great difficulty, reduced by the Consul Aquilius. This revolt was at its height in this year of the third Consulship of 'Marius, and it was quelled in the second year after it, the rebels being surrounded in their Prong holds, and obliged to surrender for want of provisions (q). The whole is mentioned now, that it may not recur hereafter to interrupt matters of more moment."
"About the fame time the Romans had been ob- liged to equip a naval armament under Marcus Antonius, known by the appellation of the Orator, against the Cilician pyrates, who had lately insetsed the seas. All that we know of this service is, in general, that it was performed with ability and success  ."
"From Macedonia, Calpurnius Pifo reported, that the victory he had gained over the Thracians had"
"  Florue,  iii.  19. (q)     19.     iii.  6. Cicero Cz Orator.  i."
"enabled"
"enabled him to penetrate to the mountains of Rho- A  dope and Caucasus. "
"Such was the state of the empire when CaiusT' Marius returned from his province in Gaul, to at the eleCtion of Consuls. He was again, by the voice of the People, called upon to resume his formier trust; but he affected, from modesty, to decline the honour. His partisans were prepared for his aCting this part, and were accordingly, by their importunities, to force him into an office which he to modestly seemed to decline. Among these, Apuleius Saturninus, at this time himself candidate for the office of Tribune, charged Ma- rius with treachery to his country in proposing to desert the republic in times of so much danger; and wish his reproaches prevailed so far as to render him passive to the will of his fellow-citizens, who wished to re-place   him again in his former flation.
In this fourth Consulate, the courage and mili   651. tary skill of Marius came to be actually exerted in 4, ' his province. The barbarous nations, after theirLutatiu return from Spain, began to appear in separate bo-Cat dies, each forming a numerous and formidable army. In one division the Cimbri and TeCtofages had passed through the whole length of Gaul to the Rhine, and from thence proceeded by the Danube to Noricum or Aultria, and were point- towards Italy by the valley of Trent. The Consul 'Lutitius Catulus was flationed near the descent of the Alps to observe the motions of this body.
In another division, the Ambrones and the Teutones hung on the frontier of the Roman province in Gaul, between the Garonne and the Rh6ne, and gave out, that they meant, by the
(0) Plutarch. in Mario.
moll O rrmoft ordinary route of the mountains, to join their
1__ - aii:csin Italy.
Upon the approach of this formidable enemy, Marius took poit on the Rh6ne at the confluence of that river with the here, and fortified his camp in the most effectual manner. The Barbarians, proaching him with cowardice for having taken these precautions, efnt, agreeably to their own no- tions of war, a formal challenge to meet them in battle; and haxing had for answer from Ma- rius, That the Romans did not consult their ene. mies to know awhen it was proper to fight, they were confirmed in the contempt which they al- ready entertained of his army, ventured to leave them behind, and proceeded in separate divisions towards Italy. Marius followed; and, with ra- pid marches, overtook them as they passed over the country without any precaution; some of them near to the Roman colony of Sextius  , and far removed from each other. Having found them under such disadvantage, and in such confusion as exposed them to slaughter, with scarcely any power of refiiance, he put the greater part to the sword. Thus part of the hordes, who had for many years been so formidable to the Ro- mans, were now entirely cut off. Ninety thou- sand prisoners, with Teutobochus, one of their kings, were taken, and two hundred thousand were said to be slain in the field (a).
The news of this vicory arriving at Rome, while it was known that another division of the fame enemy, not less formidable, was still in the field, it was not to be doubted that the command and office of Consul would be continued to Ma- (:) Now Aix, in Provence. (=) Itlurch. in Mario. Orrus,    i6. Florus,  iii.  3. Vcil:ias.ri ropiuus
rius.
rius. The populace, incited by rome of the fac A  tious Tribunes, joined, with the other uilal marks  of their attachment to his person, that of difrefpeEt and insolence to those who were supposed to be his opponents and rivals. Of there Metellus Nu- midicus, whom he had supplanted in the mand of the army againll Jugurtha, was the chief. This refpeEtable citizen, being now in the office of Censor, one Equitius, an impostor of obscure or lavish extraction, offered himself to be enrolled as a citizen, under the popular designation and name of Caius Gracchus, the son of Tiberius. The Censor, doubting his title, called upon Sem- pronia, the filler of Gracchus, to telify what ihe knew of this pretended relation; and, upon her giving evidence against him, rejeted his claim. The populace, ill-difpofed to Metellus, on account of his supposed difference with Marius, took this opportunity to insult him in the discharge of his office; attacked his house, and obliged him to take refuge in the Capitol. Even there the Tribune Saturninus would have laid violent hands on his person, if he had not been proteced by a body of the Roman Knights, who had aflembled in arms to defend him. This tumult was suppressed, but not without bloodshed.
While the popular faction were indulging inu.  653. there marks of their dislike to Metellus, they pro-i,,   ceeded to betlow the honours which they intended NM. ,qui- for Marius, and chore him for a fifth time Consul,'\"' in conjunction with  Aquilius. His late fplen- did successes againll one division of the wandering Barbarians jutlified this choice, and pointed him out as the fittest person to combat the other, which was {till expeced from the of Noricum to attempt the invasion of Italy. Catulus, the late colleague of Marius, commanding the troops that were fiationed on the Athefis, to cover the access
to o . to Italy from the valley of Trent, was destined to I. a in subordination to the Consul8 who had given '-'orders to haften the march of his victorious army"
"from the Rh6ne."
"Catulus had taken post above Verona, thrown a bridge over the Athefis, and, in order to command the paifage of that river, had fortified stations on both its banks. While he was in this pofiure, and before the juncion of Marius, the enemy arrived in his neighbourhood. The amazing works which they performed fully served to confirm the report of their numbers. They obftruaed with mounds of timber and earth the channel of the river, so as to force it to change its course; and thus, instead of passing the river, they threw it behind them in their march. They continued to float such quan- tities of wood on the fiream above the bridge which Catulus had built, that the passage of the water being topped, the bridge with all the tim- ber which was accumulated before it, was en- tirely carried off. The Roman army, on feeing such evidence of the numbers and firength of their enemy, were seized with a panic. Many deserted their colours, some fled even to Rome without halting. The Proconsul thought proper to order a retreat; and thus, by seeming to authorise what he could not prevent, he endveavoured to save in part the credit of his army."
"The level country on the Po was in this manner laid open to the incursions of the Barbarians. The inhabitants of Italy were greatly alarmed: and the Roman People passed an a& of attainder against all those who had abandoned their colours. Marius, who continued at Rome while the legions advanced on their march from Gau!, suspended the triumph which had been ordered him by the Senate, went to receive hi. aimy at the foot of the Alps, and to haften its unction with Catuals."
"Upon"
"Upon the junation of the two armies, those whoc A  had lately fled recovered their courage, and the ge- nerals determined, without loss of time, to hazard a battle. It is said that the Barbarians of this di- vision were still ignorant of the disaster which had befallen their allies on the other of the Alps, and had sent a defiance or a challenge to fight; but that being informed of this calamity when they were about to engage, they made their attack with less than their usual ferofity and confidence. Catulus received them in front. Marius made a movement to assail them in flank; but as they were hid by the clouds of dust which every where rose from the plain, he misled his way, or could not engage till after the enemy had been repulsed by Catulus, and were already put to flight. The rout was extremely bloody; an hundred and fifty thousand were said to be slain; sixty thousand ilb- mitted to be taken plifoners. The remainder of this mighty host, even the women and children, perished by their own hands; and the race of bar- barous nations who had migrated through Europe, perhaps for ages before they encountered with the Romans, now appear to have been entirely extir- pated  ."
"On receiving the news of this victory at Rome, the city relbunded with joy, and the People, in every sacrifice they offered up, addrelied them- selves to Marius as a God. He had been conflant!i attended in this war by Sylla, who, though already an objea of his jealousy, still chose to neglect the preferments of the city, and to serve in the camp. In the late viatory Marits was no more than part- ner with Catulus. Upon the arrival of the armies at Rome, he did justice to Catulus in this particu- lar, and admitted him to partake in his 'triumph. In this proceflion there were no carriages loaded ([) Plutarch. in Mario & Sylla. Orofius,    1. rlorur,  iii.  3. Vellci:. I!ul  Appian. in Cc!Lica."
"with"
"o O with gold, silver, or any precious spoils of any"
"11 fort; but, instead of them, the shattered armour"
"-' and broken swords of an enemy; the furer marks"
"of an honour justly won, and of a more important service performed. These were transported in loads, and piled up in the Capitol."
"C A "
"C A   Characer and immoderate ambition of Marius.-"
"Death of Nonius.-Re-elelTion of the lTribune Sa- turninus.-His Sedition and seizing the Capitol.- Death of Saturninus-Reverfe in the State of Par- ties.-Recal of Metellus.-Violent Death of the fribune Furiis.-Birth of Caius Julius Ccefar.- Lex Cecilia Didia.-Blank in the Roman Hijfory. -Sylla offers himself Candidate for the Office of Pretor.-Edia7 of the Censors agaiftl the Latin Rhetoricians.-Brllion in the Roman Treasury.- Present of a Groupe in golden Figures from the King of Mauritania.-Alas of Livius Drtifis.- Revolt of the Italian Allies.---Policy of the Romans in yieldig to the necefity of their Affirs.---The Laws of Plautius."
"PON the extintion of the wandering na A  tions which had now for rome time molefied . the empire, there was no foreign enemy to en- danger the peace of Italy. The wars in Thrace and in Spain had no effet beyond the provinces in which they fubfified. The infurredion of the &laves in Sicily, by the good condu& of Aquilius the Consul, to whom that service had been mitted, was near being quelled."
"Marius being now returned to the city, might have quitted the paths of ambition with uncom- mon distinction and honour. An ordinary Confu- late, after his having been so often called upon in times of danger, as the person moR likely to save his country, could make no addition to his glory. His being set aside in times of security and leisure, would even have been the most honourable and"
"VOL. I. d flattering"
"r o Knflattering comment that could have been made on"
"his former elections."
"But immoderate thirll of power, and extreme animosity to his rivals, not elevation of mind, were the charaderiftics of Marius. His ambition had hitherto passed for an aversion to ariftocratical usurp- ations. But his contempt of family diftindtions, the offspring of a vanity which made him feel the want of such honours, by clashing with the efta- blifhed Subordination of ranks in his country, came a source of difaffe to the State itself. He formed views upon the Consulate yet a sixth time; and inflead of the moderation, or the fa- tiety of honours with which he pretended to be actuated when he hoped to be prelred into office, he employed all his influence, even his money, to procure a re-eletion; and accordingly prevailed, together with Valerius Flaccus. He had warmly espoused the interest of this candidate againfi Me- tellus, more from animosity to the competitor, whose great authority, placed in opposition to him-   65. self, he dreaded, than from any regard or predi- i5 -le&ion for Fiaccus. Being chosen, in order the ;.iu 6to,  vrl.Flac- more to strengthen himself in the exercise of his"
"- power, he entered into concert with the Tribune"
"Apuleius Saturninus, and it is probable, agreed to support this facious demagogue in his pretensions to remain in office for another year; a precedent which had taken place only in the molt faaious times of the republic, and which was in itself more dangerous than any other re-election whatever. The person of the Tribune being sacred, his will was absolute, there was no check to his power fides the fear of being called to account at the ex- piration of his term; and if this fear were removed by the perpetuity of office, it was a power yet more formidable than that of the Diaator, and to be refrained only by the divisions which might"
"arise"
"arise among those who were joined together in the A  exercise of it. vw."
"The faction that was formed by Marius and the Tribune Saturninus, with their adherents, was far- ther strengthened by the accession of the Praetor Glaucia. This person, while in office, and as he fat in judgment, had received an affront from Sa- turninus, in having his chair of state broken down, for presuming to occupy any part in the attention of the People, while an assembly called by the Tribune was met. He nevertheless chole to overlook this insult, in order to be admitted a part- ner in'the consideration which was now enjoyed by these popular leaders."
"Upon the approach of the tribunitian elections, the Senate and Nobles exerted themselves to vent the re-election of Saturninus; and nine of the new candidates were, without any question,  clared to be duly elected in preference to him. The tenth place too was actually filled by the elec- of Nonius Sufenas, whom the aristocracy had supported with all its influence. But the party of Apuleius, enraged at their disappointment, had course to violence, forced Nonius, though already vested with the sacred character of Tribune, to take refuge in a work-shop, from whence he was dragged by some of the late soldiery attached to Marius, and slain. The aflembly broke up, and faber persons, though reputed of the popular par- ty, retired under the strongest impreflions of affliti- on and terror. Marius had reason to apprehend some violent solution from the Senate, and was in no haste to assemble that body. Mean time Glaucia, in the night, with a party armed with daggers, took pof- session of the Capitol and place of assembly, and, at an early hour in the morning, having gone through the forms of election, announced Apuleius again Tribune, in the place that was vacated by"
"Dd 2 the"
"Bo the murder of Nonius. This furious demagogue"
"1- was accordingly reinflated in the sacred character,"
"which, though recently violated by himself, was still revered by the bulk of the People. He was continually attended by a new set of men who fested the streets, freemen of desperate fortune, whom Marius, contrary to the eftablilhed forms of the constitution, had admitted into the legions, and who were grown fierce and insolent, as partners in the victories of that general, and who were made to expect that, in cafe the popular party should prevail, they themselves should have estates in land and comfortable settlements."
"Under the terror of so many affafins, who confidered the Nobles as enemies to their cause, Marius with his fation were become masters of the commonwealth. The better fort of the People were deterred from frequenting the public assem- blies, and no one had courage to propose, that any enquiry should be made into the death of the Tri- bune Nonius, in whose person the sacred law was again set at nought (a). Lx ArV- Apuleius hastened to gratify his party by pro."
"posing popular laws. One to seize, in name of the Public, those lands on the Po which had lately been desolated by the migrations of the barbarous nations, and to distribute them in lots to the poorer citizens  ."
"Another, by which it was resolved, that in the province of Africa a hundred jugera a man should be distributed to the veterans  : that new fettle- ments should be made in Greece, Macedonia, and Sicily : and that the money taken from the temple at Tolofa   should be employed in the purchase of lands for a like purpose: that wherever these (a) Appian Bell. Civil.  i. Plutarch. in Mario,  lxix. Valer. Max. ix.  7. Orofus,    57. Flonrus  iii.  6. (4) Appizn Bell. Civil.  i.   Aur. Viris Illullribus in Sturnino.   Nw Thouloufe. co"
"colonies"
"colonies should be planted, Marius should have ac A  power to inscribe, at each of the settlements, three VL aliens into the lift of citizens  . That the price, Lx  hitherto paid for corn by the People at the publicmn'tria. granaries, should be remitted, and that corn (hould be distributed gratis."
"Upon the intention to obtain, the lafi of those laws being known, Q Servilius Caepio, one of the Q2euftors, represented, that if such a law (hould pals, there would be an end of industry, good or- der, and government; and that the treasury of Rome would not be sufficient to defray the ex- pence. He exh6rted the Senate to employ every measure to defeat the motion. And this body ac- cordingly made a resolution, that whoever at- tempted to obtain the law: in queflion. should be deemed an enemy to his country. But'sApuleius was not to be refrained by the terrors of this solution. He proceeded to propose the law in the usual form, and had planted the rails and balloting urns for the People to give their votes, when Caepio, with a body of his attendants, had the courage to attack the Tribune, broke down the fleps; and overset the balloting urns; an ation for which he was afterwards impeached upon an accu- fation of treason, but by which, for the Drefent, he disappointed the designs of the faction  ."
"Apuleius, to extend the power of the popular assemblies, and to remove every impediment from his own designs, brought forward a number of new regulations. One to confirm a former fiatute, by which the-a of the Tribes were declared to have the force of laws. Another, declaring it to be treason for any person to interrupt a Tribune in putting a question to the People. A third, obliging the Senate to confirm every act of the Tribes"
"  Aut. Viris Illufribus:in.Satunino.   *Aut. Rhetoricorum Heiennium."
"within"
"B O within five days after such aft had passed, and re-"
"nC.I quiring every Senator, under pain of a fine, and"
"of being firuck off the rolls, to take an oath to abide by these regulations. While these motions vere in debate, some one of the party who op. posed them, in order to flop the career of this sac- tious Tribune, observed, that it thundered; a cir- cumfiance which, upon the ordinary maxims of the Roman Augurs, was sufficient to suspend any business in which the People were engaged, and to break up their assembly.  If you be not silent, laid Apuleius to the person who observed that it thundered,  you will also find that it hails. The affembiy accordingly, without being deterred by this interposition of the auspices, passed acts to these several purposes. The power of the Senate was intirely suppressed, their part of the legillature was reduced to a mere form, and even this they were not at liberty to withhold. Marius called them together,and proposed thatthey should confider what resolution they were to take with respect to a change of so much importance, and particularly with ipet to the oath which was to be exated from the members. The old warrior is said, on this occafi- on, to have pracifed an artifice by which he im- posed on many of the members, and which after- wards furnished him with a pretence for removing his enemy Metellus from their councils. He  clared himself with great warmth againit taking the oath, and by his example led other Senators to ex- press their sentiments. Metellus, in particular, as- fured the assembly, that it was his own resolution never to come under such an engagement."
"While the Senators relied on the concurrence of Marius in refilling the oath, the time appointed for administering it nearly approached; and this fil!, after the third day was far spent, assembled the Senate, set forth the dangerous slate of the monwealth; at the fame time expressed his own fears of the disturbances that might arise if the Se-"
"nate"
"nate refused to gratify the People in this matter  A  and while multitudes were assembled in the fireets vs. to know the issue of their councils, he required that the oath should be administered. He himself took it, to the altonifhment of the Senate, and the joy of the populace assembled by Apuleius, who founded applause through every part of the fireets. Metellus alone, of all who were present, refuted to comply, and withRood all the intreaties of his friends, who represented the danger with which he was threatened.  If it were always safe to do  right, he said,  who would ever do wrong?  But good men are diflingujbed, by choofing to do  right even when it is least for their safety to do "
"On the following day the Tribune Saturninus entered the Senate, and, not being stopped by the negative of any of his own colleagues, the only power that could restrain him, dragged Metellus from his place, and proffered an of attainder and banishment againfi him, for having refused the oath which was enjoined by the People. Many of the mofi refpecable citizens offered their aid to defend this illustrious Senator by force, but he him- self declined being the subject of any civil commo-  and went into exile."
"While the  which afterwards passed for his banishment was preparing, he was heard to fay,  If the times should mend, I Ihall recover my  flation; if not, it is a happiness to be absent  from hence. He fixed his abode at Smyrna, conduEted his retirement with great dignity during his exile, and probably felt as he ought, that any censure inflided by men of a vile and profligate charater was an honour."
"In these tranftaions elapsed the second year, in which Apuleius filled the office of Tribune; and, being favoured by a supineness of the opposite party contracted in a seeming despair of the repub-"
"lic,"
"B o Klic, he prevailed yet a third time in being vefled   with this formidable power. To court the favour"
"of the People, he affected to credit what was al- leged concerning the birth of Equitius; and, un- der the name of Caius Gracchus, son of Tiberius, had this impostor associated with himself in the of. fice of Tribune. The name of Gracchus, in this station, awakened the memory of former hopes and of former resentments. The party had def- tined Glaucia for the Consulate, and appear to have left Matius out of their councils. This will perhaps account for the conduEt with which he concluded his adminifiration in the present year."
"At the election which followed, the interest of the Nobles was exerted for Marcus Antonius and  Memmius. The first was declared Consul, and the second was likely to prevail over Glaucia; when, in the midst of the crowds that were aflem- bled to vote, a sudden tumult arose; Memmius was beset and murdered; and the People, alarmed at so lirange an outrage, were seized with a panic, and fled."
"In the night Glaucia, Saturninus, and the Quef- tor Saufeius, being known to be met in secret conference, all the citizens who yet retained any regard for the commonwealth crowded together, in fear of what so desperate a faction might at- tempt. All the voices were united against Satur- ninus, the supposed author of so many disorders and murders. It was proposed, without delay, to seize his person, either living or dead: but being put on his guard, by the appearance of a storm so likely to break on his head, he thought proper, with the other leaders of his party and their retain- ers in arms, to seize the Capitol, and there to fe- cure themselves, and to overawe the assembly of the People. It was no longer to be doubted that the republic was in a frate of war. Marius, who"
"had"
"had fomented these troubles from aversion to the A  Nobles, now remained undetermined what part he VLI should at. But the Senate being assembled, gave' the usual charge to himself and his colleague to avert the danger with which the republic was threatened; and both these officers, however much they were disposed to favour the sedition, being in this manner armed with the sword of the monwealth, were obliged to employ it in support of the public peace. The Senators, the Knights, and all the citizens of rank repaired in arms to their ltandard. Antonius, Consul eleced for the following year, in order to hinder the partisans of the facion from resorting to the city, was fiationed in the suburbs with an armed force  . The Ca- pitol was invested in form, and appears to have held out some days; at the end of which, in order to oblige the rebels to surrender, the pipes that sup- plied them with water were cut off. This had the intended effect. They submitted to such terms as were proposed to them; and Marius, still inclined to treat them with favour, had them confined to the hall of the Senate till farther orders. In the mean time a great party of citizens, who were in arms for the defence of the republic, impatient of delay, and thinking it dangerous to spare such daring offenders, beset them inflantly in their place of confinement, and put the whole to the sword  .
It was reported, though afterwards questioned upon a solemn occasion (i), that Caius Rabirius, a Senator of diffintion, having cut off the head of Apuleius, carried it as a trophy agreeable to the manners of those times, and had it presented for   Cicero pro.  Rabirio.   Plut. in Mario. Appian Eell. Civil.  i. Orof.    17. Flor.  iii. Aut. Viris Illult. Cicero in Sextiana in Catal.  i. Philip.   & pro Caio Rabirio. (i) At the trial of Rabirius, when, some years afterwards, he was ac- cufrd of having killed Saturninus.
some O frome days at all the entertainments which were
I- given on this occasion, and at which he was a
-- guest.
This was the fourth tribunitian sedition raised to a dangerous height, and quelled by the vigour and resolution of the Nobles. Marius, who had been obliged to aa as the infirument of the Senate on this occasion, saw his projects baffled and his cre- dit greatly impaired. Plutarch relates, that he soon after chose to leave the city for some time, on tence of a desire to visit the province of Asia, where his active spirit formed the projeE of new wars, for the conduct of which he was much better qualified than for the administration of affairs in peace.
Upon the suppression of this dangerous sedition, the commonwealth was restored to a slate which, compared to the late mixture of civil contention and military execution, may have deserved the . 6. name of public order. One office of Consul was AM. ':- frill vacant; and the election proceeding without .- -difturbance, Poftumius Albinus was joined to An- bi . tonius. Most of the other elections had also been
favourable to the Nobles; and the majority even of the Tribunes of the People were inclined to spect the Senate and the Aristocracy, as principal supports of the government.
The rift effect of this happy recovery was a motion to recal Metellus from banilhment. In this motion two of the Tribunes, Q. Pompeius Rufus and  Porcius Cato concurred. But Ma- rius having opposed it with all his influence, and Publius Furius, another of the Tribunes, having interposed his negative, it could not at that time be carried into execution. Soon after, however, the fame motion being renewed by the Tribune Callidius, and Furius having repeated his nega- tive, Metellus, son of the exile, in presence of the People, threw himself upon the ground, and, em- bracing hlie Tribune knees, beseeched him not to
withstand
withinand the recal of his father. The young man, A  from this action, afterwards acquired the Sirname . of Pius; and the Tribune, iniblently spurning him * as he .lay on the ground, served his cause by that at of. indignity perhaps more effetually than he could have done by lending a favourable ear to his requefi. The People, ever governed by their sent paffions,.were moved with tendernels and with indignation. They proceeded, without regard to the negative of Furius, under emotions of fympa- thy for the son, to recal the exiled father. The messenger of the republic, charged with the inti- mation of this resolution to Metellus, found him at Tralles in Lydia, among the fpedators at a public show. When the letters were delivered to him, he continued to the end of the entertainment with- out opening them; by this mark of indifference, treating the favour of a disorderly populace with as much contempt as he had shown to their cen- sure.
The Senate, now become the supreme power at Rome, by the dittafte which all reasonable men had taken to the violence of the opposite party, were gratified, not merely with the test of fuperio- rity they had gained in the recal of Metellus, but likewise in the downfal of some of the Tribunes who had been acive in the late disorders. Pub- lius Furius, now become an object of general  teflation, fell a sacrifice to the law of Apuleius, which declared it treason to interrupt a Tribune in putting a question to the People. Being accused by Canuleius, one of his colleagues, of violating this law, he was by the populace, who are ever carried by the torrent, and prompt for execution, prevented from making his defence; and, though a Tribune, put to death. Decianus, another of the Tribunes, in supporting the charge against Furius, happened to speak with regret of the death of Saturriinus, a crime for which he incurred a fecution, o fecution, and was banished  . So itrong was the ^_<_ tide of popularity now opposite to its late direction,
and so fatal even to their own cause frequently are the precedents or the rules by which violent men think to obtain discretionary power to themselves. The murder of Nonius was a precedent to jufiify the execution of Apuleius, and both were followed by that of Furius. The law which made it treason to interrupt the proceedings of Apuleius, was em- ployed to prevent any interruption to the ope- rations of his enemies against himself and his faction.
Amidst these triumphs of the ariftocratical party, Sextus Titius, one of the Tribunes, still had the courage to move-a revival of the Agrarian law of Gracchus. The propofai was acceptable in the as- fembly of the people (1). And the edi& was ac- cordingly passed; but it was observed, that while the People were met on this business, two ravens fought in the air above the place of assembly, and the college of Augurs, on pretence of this unfa- vourable omen, annulled the decree  . Titius, the author of it, was loon after condemned for having in his house the statue of Saturninus  .
The Consul Acquilius returned from Sicily; and having had an ovation or proceflion on foot for the reduEtion of the Sicilian slaves, was on the following year brought to trial for extortion in his province. He called no exculpatory evidence,. nor deigned to conrt the favour of his judges. But when about to.receive sentence,  Antonius, who had plead- his cause, tore open the velt of his client, and displayed to the court and the audience the scars which he bore in his breast, and which were the marks of wounds received in the service of his country. Upon this fpecacle, a sudden emotion (:) Via. Max.    .    pro  Rabirio.  (I) Juiius Obfsqurn,. Oralor.    3S.  Cicero Lcgibu,  i.
of
of pity or respect decided against the former con A  viEtion of the court, and unfixed the resolution, vl. which a few moments before they had taken to-- ' condemn the accused.
Among the events which difiinguifhed the fulate of  Antonius and A. Pofthumius Albinus, may be reckoned the birth of Caius Julius Cafar, for whose ambition the feeds oftribunitian disorder now sown were preparing a plentiful harvest. This birth, it is said, was ushered in with many presages and tokens of future greatness. If indeed we were to believe, that nature in this manner gives inti- mation of impending events, we should not be surprised that her most ominous signs were em- ployed to mark the birth of a personage who was destined to change the whole face of the political world, and to lay Rome herself, with all the nati- ons she had conquered, under a perpetuated mili- tary government.
Antonius and Albinus were succeeded in officeu.  655. by Q. Cacilius Metellus and Titus Didius. The Q- CTciliug war iill continued in Spain, and fell to the lot ofNep,, Didius. Upon his arrival in the Province, Dola  Didiu'. bella, the Propraetor, set out on his return to Rome, and, for his victories in Spain, obtained a triumph. Metellus remained in the adminifiration of affairs in Italy.
The adminifiration of the present year is difinn- Lex Ccii- guifhed by an at in which both Consuls concurred, Didia. and which is therefore marked in the title with their joint names. The Roman People had frequently experienced the defedt of their forms in the manner of enacting laws. Factious Tribunes had it in their power to carry motions by furprize, and to pass in the fame law a variety of clauses; and, by obliging the people to pass or rejet the whole in one vote, frequently obtained, under the favour of some popular clauses, ads of a very dangerous tendency. To prevent this abuse, it was now
enated, o enaated, upon the joint motion of the Consuls Ca-
__ cilius and Didius, that every proposed law should
be made public three market days before it could receive the ailent of the people: that all its differ- ent clauses should be separately voted: and that it should be lawful for the People to pass or rejec the whole or any part of it  .
This law had a salutary tendency; and, though far from sufficient to prevent a return of the late evils, it served for a time to flop the current of tribunitian violence; but while the source was open, any mere temporary stagnation could only tend to increase the force with which it occasionally burfi over every impediment of law or good order that was placed in its way. And the inefficacy of measures taken upon the fuppreflion of any danger- ous sedition to eradicate the evil, shows the ex- treme difficulty with which men are led, in most cafes, to make any great and thorough reforma- 
It is somewhat singular, that about this time, in the midit of so much animosity of the People to the Senate and Nobles, this superior class of the citizens were the patrons of austerity, and tended for sumptuary laws, while the popular Tri- bunes contended for licence.  What is your li-  berty, said the Tribune Duronius to the Peo- ple (while he moved for a repeal of the sumptuary law of Fannius),  if you may not consume what ' is your own; if you muff be restrained by rule  and mealure; if you must be flinted in your pleasures ? Let us shake off, I pray you, these  musty remains of antiquity, and make free to enjoy what we and our fathers have gained  ."
"For the petulance of there exprellions, this Tri- bune was, by the judgment of the Ceniors, on the   Cic. Philip.  Pro domo fua. Epilt. Atticum,     val. ..    9."
"following"
"following year, expelled from the Senate; and he A  took his revenge by prosecuting the Censor An- vt. tonius for bribery in canvafling for his office.   656."
"Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and Publius Liciniuscn corne- Crassus being railed to the office of Consul, the lat- lus,  Lic ter was appointed to relieve Didius in Spain, andniuciru'. the other to succeed Metellus In Italy. There is, during some years, a considerable blank in the materials from which we collet this hitlory; little more is recorded than the fuccellion of Consuls with the number of years, and a few particulars that ill supply the interval in our accounts of what pafled in the city, or in the series of important as- fairs abroad. So far as there particulars, however, can be referred to their refpetive dates, it will be proper, while we endeavour to mark the lapse of time, to record them in the order in which they are supposed to have happened.
In the present year are dated two remarkableu.  656. ats of the Senate; one to condemn the use of ma- gic, another to prohibit human sacrifices (q): the first proceeding, perhaps, from credulity in the authors of the law, the other implying some mains of a gross and inhuman fuperfiition, which was frill entertained by the People though rejected by the Government  .
In the following Consulate the kingdom of Cy- rene was bequeathed to the Romans by Ptolomy Appion, the late king. But, as this People sessed themselves to be the general patrons of li- berty, where this blefiing was not forfeited by some adt of ingratitude or perfidy in their allies, they did not avail themselves of this legacy, leav- the fubjedts of Cyrene to retain for some lime the independence of their'nation with a species of popular government; and in this form they were allowed to remain as a separate State, until, in a
() Plin,  xxx.  1.   Dion. Caflius,  xlii.  2X6.
general O general arrangement made of all the dependencies . of the empire, they came to be reduced to the form
of a province.   65S. The following Consuls gave its name and its .i:' date to an acQ of the People nearly of the fame ,fi.-sce-tenour with some of those formerly pafled for the .-Lcn. exclusion of aliens. The inhabitants of Italy fiill iia dc continued the practice of crowding to Rome, in bu expectation of obtaining in a body the prerogative"
"of citizens, or at leat of intruding themselves, as many of them separately did, into some of the Tribes, by which persons of this description, from voting at elecions, came themselves by degrees to be elected into the higher offices of State."
"Times of fation were extremely favourable to this intrusion of strangers. Different leaders nived at the inrolment of those who were likely to favour their refpedtive parties. And the facious Tribunes, in whatever degree they may have fa- voured the general claim of the allies to be admit- ted as Romans, treated the fubje& as matter of opposition to the Senate. They expected to raise the fiorm of popular animosity and tumult with the more ease, in proportion as the numbers of the people encreafed. By the act of Licinius and Mucius, nevertheless, a scrutiny was set on foot, and all who, without a jus title, ventured to ex- ercife any privilege of Roman citizens, were mitted to their several boroughs  ."
"In this Consulate is likewise dated the trial of Servilius Cspio, for his supposed misconduct about ten years before in his command of the army againfi the Cimbri. He had exasperated the po- pular faction, by opposing the a of Saturninus for the gratuitous distribution of corn, and his enemies were now encouraged to raise this prose- culion against him. The People gave sentence of"
"  Aoln. in Orat. pro Coraclio Majeft. reo."
"condem-"
"condemnation, and violently drove from the placec A  of assembly two of the Tribunes who ventured to interpose their negative in his favour. Authors, according to Valerius Maximus, have differed in their accounts of the sequel; some affirming that Cepio, being put to death in prison, his body was dragged through the itreets as that of a traitor, andcaft into the river; others, that he was, by the favour of Antifitis. one of the Tribunes, rescued, or enabled to make his escape  ."
"C. Norb.anus, who was said to be author of the riot which occasioned the condemnation of CQepio, and the supposed cruel execution of that citizen, was or the following year brought to trial himself for mal-adminifiration and sedition in office; but, by his own popularity, and the address of the ora- tor Antonius, who pleaded his cause, was ac- quitPte.dna)."
"The war i Spain fill continued; and the Ro- mnans having gained considerable victories, sent ten commiflsoners, to endeavour, in concert with Crassus and Didius, to make such arrangements aS might tend to the future peace of those provinces; but in vain; hostilities were again renewed in the following year."
"L. Cornelius Sylla4 who had been Quaftor inu. 66g. the year of Rome fix hundred and forty-fix now, Val. after an interval of about fourteen years, and with Hier'rc- out having been Edile, flood candidate for the of-iu ficeof Prator. Whether his negleAt of political honours, during this period, proceeded from idle- nets, or from want of ambition, is uncertain. His character will justify either conitrution, being equally susceptible of diflipation, and of the disdain of ordinary diftintions. The people, however, refused to gratify him in his desire of passing on to the office of Prator without being Edile; as they"
"  Val. Max.    7.   Cicero do Orator,   . I. e were"
"B o were resolved to be gratified with the magnificent"
". shows of wild beasts, which his supposed corre-
fpondence with the king of Mauritania enabled him to furnish. But to remove this objection to his preferment, he gave out, that as Pretor he was to exhibit the fame shows which were expected from him as Edile; and having, in the following year, persisted in his suit, he was accordingly elet-  and fulfilled the expecations of the People; insomuch, that he is said to have let loose in the Circus a hundred maned or male lions, and to have exhibited the method of baiting or fighting them by Mauritanian huntfmen  . Such was the price which candidates for preferment at Rome were obliged to pay for public favour.
In this variable scene, where so many particular men excelled in genius and magnanimity, while the State itself was subjet to the government.of a capricious and disorderly multitude,  Rifflius, late Qeiflor in Asia, exhibited a spectacle sufficient to counterbalance the lions of Sylla; and, if it were permitted in any cafe whatever to treat our country with disdain, an instance to be applauded of the just contempt with which the undeserved fentments of corrupt and malicious men ought to be received. Having reformed many abuses of the equestrian tax-gatherers in the province which he governed, he was himself brought before the tri- bunal of an equestrian jury, to be tried for the crime he had restrained in others. In this situation he declined the aid of any friend, told the judges he would make no defence; but fiated the parti- culars by which he had offended his prosecutors, left the court to decide, and, being condemned, retired to Smyrna, where he ever after lived in great tranquility, and could not be prevailed on, even by Sylla in the height of his power, to return
(a) Piin.   .  16.
to
to Rome  . Great as the State and Republic of A Rome was become, unmerited disgrace was cer-  tainly ajuf object of contempt or indifference.
The Proconsuls, Didius and Crassus, were per- mitted to triumph for victories obtained in Spain, but had not been able to eitablifh the peace of that country. The war which broke out afresh in one of the provinces was committed to Valerius Flac- cus, and the care of the other to Perperna, one of theConfuls. Flaccus, near the town of Belgida, obtained a great victory, in which were slain about twenty thousand of the enemy; but he could not prevail on the canton to filbmit. Such of the Peo- ple as were inclined to capitulate, deliberating on terms, were beset by their fellow-citizens, and the house in which they were assembled being set on fire, they perished in the flames.
The war having been likewise renewed with theu.  661. Thracians on the frontiers of Macedonia, Geminius,  audiu who commanded there in the quality of Propraetor,Ni. Pci was defeated, and the province over-run by the\"' enemy.
The Praetor Sylla, at the expiration of his office, was sent into Asia with a commiflion to reflore Ariarathes to the kingdom of Cappadocia, which had been seized by Mithridates, and to restore Py- lamenes to that of Paphlagonia, from which he had been expelled by Nicomedes king of Bythinia. The Preetor having successfully executed both there cOmmiflions, continued his journey to the Euphra- tes, where he had a conference, and concluded a treaty with an ambassador from Ariarathes king of the Parthians  .
From an ediet of the Censors, Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus and  Licinius Crassus, condemning   Val. Max.    17.   Ixx. Orlofiu,    17. Ck. Orat. & in Bruto. Pxdianus in Divinationem. Velleius,    Plutarch. in Sylla. Appian. in Mithridatico. JuRin,  xxiii, ltrabo,  xii. e the
; o the schools of Latin rhetoric  , it appears that
, the Romans, during this period, ifill received with
relutance the refinements which were gradually taking place in the literary as well as in the other arts.  Whereas information, said the Censors in their edit,  has been lodged before us that"
"'schools are kept by certain persons, under the  title of Latin rhetoricians, to which the youth of this city retort, and at which they pass intire  days in frivolity and sloth; and whereas our an-  cefiors have determined what their children should  learn, and what exercises they ought to fre-  quent: these innovations on the customs and manners of our forefathers being, in our opinion,
offenfiveand wreng, we publish these presents,  that both masters and scholars, given to there  illicit prafices, may be duly apprised of our ' pleasure (a). Cicero being now fourteen years of age, and employed in learning that eloquence for which he became so famous, was probably volved in this censure, as frequenting the schools which, by this formal edit of the magifirate, were condemned."
"In the Consulate of Marcus Philippus and Sext. Julius Cafar, according to Pliny, there were in the Roman treasury sixteen hundred and twenty- eight thousand eight hundred and twenty-nine pondo   of gold  , or between sixty and fe- venty or eighty milions fierling. In the fame year a present sent from the king of Mauritania had near- ly produced a civil warin the commonwealth, and greatly inflamed the passions from which that cala- mity soon after arose. Bocchus, in order to mind the Romans of the merit he had acquired by delivering jugurtha into their hands, had caused   Cicer. Orator.  iii. . 4. (a) A. Geliu.,    Ax.    Roman pondo of ten ounces.     Harducn,  xxxiii.  3."
"this"
"this feene to be represented in a groupe of images A  of gold, containing his own figure, that of Ju-   gurtha, and that of Sylla, to whom the unhappy prince was delivered up. Marius, under whose auspices this tranfadtion had passed, being provoked at having no place in the representation of it, at- tempted to pull down the images after they had been erected in the place of their deltinatiori in the Capitol. Sylla was equally solicitous tohave them remain; and the contest was likely to end in vio- lence,. if matters of greater moment had not arisen to occupy the ardent and vehement spirit of there rivals."
"The expetations of all parties at Rome, and throughout Italy, were now raised by the projets of Liviis Drufus, an' aive Tribune, who, in or- der to distinguish himself, brought forward many fubjeds of the greatest concern to the public. He acted at first in concert with the leading men of the 'Senate, and was supported by them in order to obtain some amendment in the law as it then flood with rerpe& to the courts of julfice. The Equefirian order had acquired exclusive poffeflion of the judicature. The Senators wished to recover at lealt a Ihare in that prerogative; and Drufus, inLer ju- order to gratify them, moved for an act of whichdicii- the tendency was, to reflore the judicative power of the Senate: to prevent opposition from the Equefrian order, he proposed, at once, to enrol three hundred knights into the Senate; and that the Senators, who appear at this time to have amounted to no more than three hundred, might not withstand this increase of their numbers, he left to each the nomination of one of the new members; proposing, that from the fix hundred so constituted, the lifts of judges should be taken  . Many of   Appian. Bell. Civ.  i. uAt. ViriElllufribus,  66. Ci- cero pro Clientio. t"
"the"
"D o Kthe knights were reconciled to this arrangement, by"
"- the hopes of becoming Senators; but the order, in -' general, seem to have confidered it as a snare laid
to deprive them of their consequence in the go- vernment of their country; and individuals fused to accept of a place in the Senate, at the hazard of so great and so sudden a change in the condition of their own order, and of the conftitu- of the State  . ti te- This Tribune likewise proposed an a& to debase ma ' the silver coin, by mixing an eighth of alloy. But
the part of his projec which gave the greatest alarm, was that which related to the indigent citi- zens of Rome, and to the inhabitants of Italy in general.  Co- With, a view to gratify the poorer citizens he : .. proposed that all the new settlements, projeted by
the law of Caius Gracchus, should now be carried into execution. The Consul, Marcus Perperna, having ventured to oppose this proposal, he was, by order of the Tribune, taken into cufiody; and so roughly treated in the execution of this order, lhat, while he struggled to disengage himself, the blood was made to spring from his noitrils.  It"
"is no more than the pickle of the turtle-fifh  , said the Tribune, a species of delicacy, in which, it seems, among other luxuries of the table, this Consul was supposed frequently to indulge him- self. if-  ci- For the allies of Italy, Livius Drufus proposed i  so-. to obtain the favourite object on which they had"
"been so long intent, the privileges and powers of Roman citizens. In all his other proposals, he had the concurrence of some party in the common- wealth, and by persuasion, or force, had obtained (!) Appia. cl. Civ. fib. i. Aut. Viris Illuflribus,  66. Ci- cr ro Clicntio.   Ex turdis maria. Aut Viris Iliultribus, inL. Druf. Val. Max. i  ix.  5. Florus."
"hiW"
"his purpose; but in this he firuck at the perfonalc A  consideration of every citizen, and wasoppofed by the unanimous voice of the whole People. This Tribune used to boast, that he would exhaust every fund from which any order of men could be gratified, and leave to those who came after him nothing to give, but the air and the earth  . The citizens in general, however, were become tired of his favours, and the people of Italy were ill- disposed to requite the merit of a projeEt which he had not been able to execute. Soon after the mo-  -which he made in favour of the Italians, had been rejected, Drufus was suddenly taken ill in the public assembly, and Papirius Carbo, another of the Tribunes,'made a short speech on the occasion, which, among a People prone to fuperfiition, and ready to execute whatever they conceived to be awarded by the gods, probably hastened the fate of his falling colleague:  Marcus Drufus ! he said, ' the father 1 call, not this degenerate son; thou who ufedft to fay, The commonwealth is  sacred, whoever violates it is sure to be pu- - nifhed. The temerity of the son has evinced the wifdorn of the father. A great shout arose in the assembly, and Drufus  , being attended to his own house by a numerous multitude, received in thecrowd a secret wound of which he died (i). All his laws were soon after repealed, as having passed under unfavourable auspices. But the habitants of Italy were-not to be appeared under their late disappointment, and discontents were breaking out in every part of the country, which greatly alarmed the republic.
In this state of public uneasiness, some fecutions were raised by the Tribunes, calculated to gratify their own private resentments, and tend-   Floruw,  iii.  17.   Cicero in Bruto,  63. (i) Veleius,   13, 14. Appian. Florua ,  iii.  17. o to excite animofities. Q_ Varius Hybrida ob-
tained a decree of the People, directing, that quiry fliould be made by whose fault the allies had been made to expect the freedom of the city. In consequence of an inquest set on foot for this pur- pose,  Calphurnius Beftia, late Consul, and  Aurelius Orator, and other eminent men, were condemned  . Mummius Achaicus was banish- to Delos. Emilius Scaurus, who had long main- tained his dignity as Princeps, or firfi on the roll of the Senate, was cited on this occasion before the People, as a person involved in the fame guilt. Quintus Varius, the Tribune, who accused him, being a native of Spain, Scaurus was acquitted upon the following short defence: Q. Varius,  from the banks of the Sucro, in Spain, fays, That   Emilius Scaurus, firit in the roll of the Se-  nate, has encouraged your fubjets to revolt;  Varius maintains the charge; Scaurus denies it  There is no other evidence in this matter: chufe  whom you will believe  .
The year following, Varius himself was tried, and condemned agreeably to his own act; and while the prosecutions fufi-ended all other civil affairs, and even the meafiures required for the safety of the public, the inhabitants of Italy were forming dangerous combinations, and were ready to break out in actual rebellion. -They were.exaf- perated with having 'their suit not only refused, but in having the abettors of it at Rome confidered as criminals. They sent deputies to meet at Cor- finium, and to deliberate on a plan of operations. Their deputies were to form a Senate, and to chufe two executive officers, under the denomina- of Consuls.   Appian. Vai. Mix.    6. Cicero in Brnto. (1) Cicero pro  Scauro filio. Aut. Viris IlluRribus,  72. Qui., tilizn.    1z. VaL Max.  iii.  7.
The
The Romans took their firt fCufpicion of a dan- A  gerous design in agitation among their allies, from VL bbferving that they were exchanging hofiages a- mong themselves. The Proconsul Seryilius, who commanded in the Picenum, having intelligence to this purpose from Afculum, repaired thither, in order, by his presence, to prevent any commo-  but his coming, in reality, hastened the revolt. His remonstrances and his threats made the inhabitants sensible that their designs were known, and that the execution of them could no longer in safety be delayed. They accordingly took arms, and put to the sword the Proconsul Servilius, with his lieutenant, and all the Roman citizens who happened to be in the place. The alarm immedi- ately spread throughout all the towns that were concerned in the plot; and, as upon a signal agreed, the Marfi, Peligni, Veflini, Marcini, Pi- centes, Ferentanm, Hiypini, Pompeiani, Venufini, Apuli, Lucani, and Samnites, took arms, and sent a joint deputation to Rome to demand a par- ticipation in the privileges of Roman citizens; of which they had, by their services, contributed so largely to encreafe the value.
In answer to this demand they were told by the Senate, That they must discontinue their assem- blies, and renounce their pretensions; otherwise, that they must not presume to fend any other mef- sage to Rome.
War being thus declared, both parties preparedu.  661. for the conteit. The allies murtered a hundredl. Juliu thousand men, in different bodies, and under dif Rutilius ferent leaders': The Romans found themselves inLuPu an infiant brought back to the condition in which they had been about three hundred years before; reduced to a few miles of territory round their walls, and beset with enemies more united, and more numerous than ever had assailed them at once on the fame ground. But their city was likewise en-"
"larged,"
"B o slarged, their numbers encreafed, and every indi-"
"IL vidual excellently formed to serve the State, as a ' warrior and a citizen. All of them assumed, up-
pon this occasion, the fagum, or military dress; and being joined by such of the Latins as mained in their allegiance, and by such of their colonies, from different parts of Italy, as conti- nued to be faithful, together with some mercena- ries from Gaul and Numidia, they assembled a force equal to that of the allies.
The Consuls were placed at the head of the two principal armies; Lucius Julius Caesar, in the coun. try of the Samnites (in), and Rutilius, in that of the Marfi  . They had under their command the most celebrated and experienced officers of the republic; but little more is preserved to furnish out the history of this war than the names of the Roman commanders, and those of the persons op- posed to them. Rutilius was attended by Pom- peius Strabo, the father of him who afterwards bore the title of Pompey the Great; Caspio, Per- perna, Meffala, and Caius Marius, of whom the !aft had already fooften been Consul. Cafar had, in the army which he commanded, Lentulus, Di- dius, Crassus; and Marcellus. They were opposed by  Afranius,  Ventidius, Marcus Egnatitls, Qo Pompedius,  Papius,  Lamponius,  Ju- dacilius, Hircus, Aflinius, and Vetius Cato, at the head of the allies. The forces were similar in discipline and in arms. The Romans were likely to be inferior in numbers and in resources, but had the advantage in reputation, authority, and in the fame of their leaders, inured to command in the highest stations. But so well had the allies' taken their measures, and with so much animbfity did (  Now pzrtof iLh kine-om of Naptee. ) Ccre igucuL part of the EcclCGaftical State.
they
they fiupport a quarrel, which they had been me- A  ditating for some years, that the Romans appeared vl at first unequal to the contest, and were furprifedt'- and overcome in many encounters.
The detail of these operations is imperfectly corded; and does not furnilh the materials of a lation either intereffing or infiruftive. We must therefore content ourselves with a lift of actions and events, and with the general result.
One of the Consuls, Lucius Cafar, in the first. encounter of the war, was defeated by Vetius Cato near Efernia, and had two thousand men killed in the field. The town of Efernia was immedi- ately invested, and some Roman Officers of tintion were obliged to make their escape in the disguise of slaves. Two Roman cohorts were cut off at Venafrum, and that colony fell into the hands of the enemy. The other consul, Rutilius, was likewise defeated by the Marfi, and fell in the .eld, with eight thousand men of his army. His colleague was called to the city to preside at the eleAion of a successor; but being necessarily detained with the army, the office continued va- cant for the remainder of the campaign, while the army aaed under the direction of the late Consuls, Marius and Capio.
The corpse of Rutilius, and of other persons of rank, being brought to public funeral at Rome, so alarmed and funk the minds of the People, that the Senate decreed, that, for the future, the dead should be buried where they fell.
In the mean time, Lucius Cafar obtained a vic- tory in the country of the Samnites; and the Se- nate, in order to restore the confidence of the Peo- ple, as if this victory had suppressed the revolt, resolved, that the fagum, or military dress, should be laid aside  .   .   Ixxi . Appian. Orofius,    i2. oru. ,  iii.  18. Vcllciii. uLIroli.
The 0 0 The usual time of the Consular elecions being ,,-, come, Cn. Pompeius Strabo and Porcius Cato ;.  66- were named. ct.bo,'. Pompey gained a complete victory over the  Po.iu3 Marfi; and, notwithstanding an obstinate defence, CIto. reduced the city of Afculum, where hostilities at
first had commenced, and where the Romans had suffered the greatest outrage. The principal inha- bitants of the place were put to death, the remain- der were fold for slaves. The other Consul, Cato, was killed in an attack upon the entrenchments of the Marfi; and although Marius and Sylla, in different quarters, had turned the fortune of the war againit the allies, yet the event still continued to be extremely doubtful.
The Umbrians, Etruscans, and the inhabitants of other diftri of Italy, who had hitherto hefi- tated in the choice of their party, took courage from the perseverance and success of their neigh- bours, and openly joined the revolt. The more distant parts of the empire were soon likely to seize the contagion: they were already, by the obltruc- they met with in carrying supplies of provifi- ons or revenue, fevered from the capital, and the allegiance they owed as conquered provinces, when- ever they favi their opportunity to withdraw it, was likely to vanish like a dream or ideal existence.
Mithridates, the king of Pontus, did not ne- glect the occasion that was offered to him; he put al! his forces in motion, expelled Nicomedes from Bythinia, and Ariobarzones from Cappadocia, and made himfrif master of the greater part of the Lesser Asia.
In this extremity it appeared necessary to ply with the demands of the allies; but the Senate had the address to make this conceflion seem to be an act of munificence and generosity, not of weak- ness or fear.
The
The Latins, who had continued in their allegi A  ance, were, in consideration of their fidelity,  vL mitted toallthe privileges of Roman citizens. The- Umbri and Tuscans, who either had not yet  clared, or who had been least forward in the war, were next comprehended; and the other inhabi- tants of Italy, observing, that they were likely to obtain by favour what they endeavoured to extort by force, grew remiss in the war, or withdrew from the league, that they might appear to be forward in the general return to peace.
The Marfi, Samnites, and Lucanians, who had been, the principal authors of the revolt, or who had acted with most animosity in the conduct of it, continued for some time to be excluded from the privilege of Romans. But the civil war, which soon after broke out among the citizens themselves, terminated either in the extirpation of those aliens, and in the settlement of Roman colonies in their llead, or gave them an opportunity, under favour of the party they espoused, of gaining admittance to the privilege to which they aspired: so that, in a few years, all the inhabitants of Italy, from the Rubicon to the Straits of Meflina, were become citizens of Rome; and a conflitution of slate, which had been already overcharged by the num- bers that partook of its sovereignty, was now alto- gether overwhelmed; or if this change alone were not sufficient to destroy it, was not likely long to remain without tome notable and fatal revolution. Assemblies of the People, already sufficiently tu- multuary, being now confidered as the collective body of all the Italians, were become altogether impracticable, or could be no more than partial tumults raised in the fireets of Rome, or the tiguous fields, for particular purpfles: insomuch that when we read of the authority of the Senate being set aside by an order of the People, we may venture to conceive all government lufpbnded at
the the infiance of that party, who had then the popu-  lace of Rome at their call. ~.- Licinius CralTus and  Julius Cafar were chosen
Cenrors, in order to make up the new rols- of the People. This, it is likely, was found to be a ficult and tedious work. It became necessary to scrutinize the rolls of every separate borough, in order to know who were entitled to be added to the lift of Roman citizens; and this difficulty was farther encreafed in consequence of a law devised about this time by Papirius Carbo, in which it was enaced, that not only the natives and ancient  nizens of Italy, but all who should, for the future, obtain the freedom of any Italian borough, if they had a residence in Italy, and had given in their claim to the Preetor sixty days, should by that at become citizens  : so that the prerogative of the Roman People continued to be in the gift of every separate corporation, as well as in that of the State itself.
The number of the aliens admitted on the rolls, at this muster, is not recorded; but it was proba- bly equal to that of the ancient citizens, and might have instantly formed a very powerful and danger- ous faction in the State, if effectual measures had not been taken to guard against the effect of their influence. For this purpose, they were not mixed promiscuously with the mass of the People, but confined to eight particular Tribes (q); by this means they could only influence eight votes in thirty-five  ; and the ancient citizens were still possessed of a great majority. But this artifice did not long escape the attention of those who were ag-  Cicero pro Archia Poata. (q) Veilcius Pa.erculus,    to.   Historians mention this particular, as if eight new Tribes vere added to the former thirty-five; but the continual allusion of Roman .'ri- ters, to the number thirty-five, will not allow us to suppose any augmnn- tsioa. Cicero Lege Agraria zda,  8.
grieved
grieved by it, and became the subjea of a newc A  dispute. 
While the Romans were meditating, or a&cually making this important change in the Rate of the commonwealth, they found leisure for matters of less moment, in which they endeavoured to vide for the peace of the city, and the adminiftra- of juflice.
Plautius, one of the Tribunes, obtained a newLex Plotia law for the selection of judges, by which it wasde Judi . enacted, That each Tribe should annually elet fifteen citizens, without any distinction of rank; and that, from the whole so named, the judges in all trials that occurred within the year should be taken (1). This law appeared to be equitable, as it gave, with great propriety, to all the different classes of men in the State, an equal right to be named of the juries; and to every party cerned, an equal chance of being tried by his peers.
The fame Tribune likewise obtained a law forLex Plotia the preservation of the public peace, by which itde i. was declared capital to be seen in public with a weapon, or instrument of death; to occupy any place of firength in the city; to offer violence to the house of any person, or to disturb any pany; to interrupt any meeting of the Senate, as- fembly of the People, or court of jultice. To these clauses Catulus subjoined another, in which he comprehended persons surrounding the Senate with an armed force, or offering violence to any magistrate  .
()' Pedianus in Cornelianam Ciceroras.   Cicero pro Calio, et Arufpicumr Rrpontr. . A  Vl. Trirumph of Pompeius Strabi.-Progrefs of SyUid.-
$War with the Kiig of Pntus.-Rife of that Kingdom.-Appointment of Sylla to comnnmaud.-- Policy of the Tribrne Sulpicius.-SyllT Cinm ffioi recalled in Favour of Marius.-His March fi-om Campania to Romie.-Expels Marius and his Sac- from the City.-His Operations in Greece.- Siege of Athens.-Battle of Chaeronea.-Of Or- cholnenos. ranifalions at Rome.-Policy of Cinnai -Marius recalled.-Ciina flies, and is deprived.- Recovers the Poffeffon of Rome.--Treaty of Sylla with Mithridates.-He passes into Italy.-Is op- posed by numerous AJrmies.-- ariaos Events of the IYar in Italy.-Sylla prevails.-His Proscription, or Mafacre.--Namied Dictator.-His Policy-Rr- Jignation-a-nd Death. o . social war, though far from being fuc-   cefsful, concluded with a triumphal procef- sion; and the Senate, though actually obliged to yield the point for which they contended, thought proper, under pretence of advantages gaitled orl some particular occasions, to eret a trophy. They singled out Pompeius Strabo for the pageant in this ceremony; either because he had reduced As- culum, where the rebellion first broke out, or cause a victory obtained by him had moit immedi- ately preceded the peace. But the most remarka- ble circumfiance in this proceflion was, its being, in shew, a triumph of the old citizens over the new, but in reality a triumph of the latter. Ven- tidius Baffus, being a prisoner in the war, and led as such in the present triumph, came in thg form"
"of"
"of a captive to share in the prerogatives of a Ro- A  man; he was, in the sequel, promoted to all the honours of the State; and himself, in the capacity of a vitorious general, led a proceflion of the fame kind with that in which he had made his first en- try at Rome as a captive (a)."
"Sylla, by his conduct and his successes wherever he had borne a separate command in this war, gave proof of that superior genius by which he now began to be distinguished. By his magnanimity on all occasions, by his great courage in danger, by his imperious exactions from the enemy, and by his lavish profusion to his own troops, he ob- tained, in a very high degree, the confidence and attachment of his soldiers, and yet in this, it is probable, he acted from temper, and not fiom  sign, or with any view to what followed. With so careless and so bold a hand did this man already hold the reins of military discipline, that Albinus, an officer of high rank, and next in command to himself, being killed by the soldiers in a mutiny, he treated this outrage as a trifle, faying, when the matter was reported to him, That the troops would atone for it when they met with the enemy  ."
"With the merits he had recently displayed in thisu.  66s. war, he repaired to the city, laid claim to the Con-LlC : fulate, and was accordingly chosen in conjuntion Pomp. Ru- with Quintus Pompeius Rufus. sus, Cos."
"It was thought necessary still to keep a proper force under arms in Italy, until the public tran- quillity should be fully efiablifhed. The army, which had acted under Cneius Pompeius Strabo, Conffil of the preceding year, was destined for this service; and Qgintus Rufus was appointed to the command of it. (a) Val.    9. Gellins,    4. Plin.    43. Dio Caflius, 43. fine.   Plutarch. inSylla.  . f The"
"B The war with Mithridates, king of Pontus,"
"'... however, was the principal object of attention;"
"and this province, together with the army then ly- in Campania, fell to the lot of Sylla."
"The monarchy of Pontus had risen upon the ruins of the Macedonian establishments in Asia; and, upon their entire suppression, was come one of the most considerable kingdoms of the East."
"Mithridates had inherited from his ancestors a great extent bs territory, reaching in length, ac- cording to the representation of his own ambaffa- dor in Appian, twenty thousand Radia, above two thousand miles. He himself had joined to it the kingdom of Colchis, and other provinces on the coafis of the Euxine sea. His national troops amounted to three hundred thousand foot, and forty thousand horse, besides auxiliaries from Thrace, and from that part of Scythia which lies on the Meotis and the Tanais, countries over which he had acquired an ascendant approaching to a sovereignty. He had pretensions likewise on the kingdoms of Bithynia and Cappadocia, which he had hitherto relinquished from refpet to the Romans; or of which he had deferred the effect until he should be prepared to cope with this for- midable power. All his pretensions indeed, like those of other monarchs, were likely to extend with his force, and to receive no limitation but from the defect of his power. And such were his resources, and his personal character, that, if he had encountered on the of Europe with an enemy less able than the Romans were to with- fiand his progress, it is probable that in his hands the empire of Pontus might have vied with that of the greater conquerors. '"
"About the time that the social war broke out in Italy, Cafiius Longinus, Manius Acquilius, and  Oppius were, in different characters, Rationed in"
"the"
"the province of Asia, and took under their proteai A  on every power in that country that was likely to vL' oppose the progress of Mithridates."
"Nicomedes, who had been recently restored to the crown of Bithynia, made hostile incursions un- der the encouragement of there Roman generals, even into the kingdom of Pontus. Mithridates, having made fruitless complaints to them on this fubjead; and thinking that the diftrafted state of Italy furnished him with a favourable opportunity to flight their resentment, he sent his son Ariara- thes into Cappadocia with a force to expel Ario- barzanes, though an ally of the Romans, and to possess that kingdom. He took the field him- self, and sent powerful armies, under his generals, against Nicomedes, and against the Romans, who had assembled all the force of their province and of their allies, to the amount of an hundred and twenty thousand men, in different bodies, to defend their own frontier, or to annoy their enemy."
"Mithridates fell separately upon the several divi- sions of his enemies forces; and having defeated Nicomedes, and afterwards Manius, obliged the Roman officers, with their ally, to retire; Caflius to Apamea, Manius towards Rhodes, and Nico- medes to Pergamus. His fleet, likewise, consist- of three hundred gallies, opened the passage of the Hellespont, took all the ships which the Ro- mans had flationed in those straits; and he himself loon after in person traversed Phrygia and the Les- ser Asia, to the sea of Cilicia and Greece. In all the cities of the Lesser Asia, where the people now openly declared their deteflation of the Roman dominion, he was received with open gates. He got possession of the person of Oppius, by means of the inhabitants of Laodicea, where this general had taken refuge with a body of mercenaries. The mercenaries were allowed to disband, but"
"F 2 Oppius"
"B o sOppius himself was conduced as a prisoner to the"
". head-quarters of Mithridates, and, in mockery of
his state as a Roman governor, was made to pass through the cities in his way, with his fasces or en- signs of magifiracy carried before him.
Manius Acquilius likewise fell into the hands of the enemy, and was treated with similar scorn; and with a barbarity which nothing but the most crimi- nal abuse of the power he lately possessed could have deserved or provoked. Being carried round the cities of Asia on an ass, he was obliged at every place to declare, that his own avarice was the cause of the war; and he was at last put to death by the pouring of melted gold into his throat.
While Mithridates thus overwhelmed his ene- mies, and was endeavouring to complete his quest of Asia by the reduction of Rhodes, he order- his general Archelaus to penetrate by the way of Thrace and Macedonia into Greece.
Such was the alarming ilate of the war when the Romans, having scarcely appeased the troubles in Italy, appointed  Cornelius Sylla, with fix legions that lay in Campania, to embark for Greece, in or- der, if poflible, to siem a torrent which no ordinary bars were likely to withstand.
But before Sylla or his colleague could depart for their provinces disorders arose in the city, which, without waiting the approach of foreign enemies, brought armies to battle in the streets, and covered the pavements of Rome with the slain.
Publius Sulpicius, Tribune of the People, with a singular boldness and profligacy, ventured to tamper with the dangerous humours which were but ill suppressed in the event of the late troubles; and, as if the State had no experience of civil wars and domestic tumults, lighted the torch anew, and kindled the former animosity of the popular and Senatorian parties. The severe measures hitherto
taken
taken by the Senate and Magistrates against thec A  authors of sedition had, in some inflances, been  effectual to (hatch the republic out of the hands, of'~ lawless men, and to suspend for a while the ruin of the commonwealth; but the examples so. given, inflead of deterring others from a repetition of the fame crimes, appear only to have admonished the faEtious leaders to take proper precautions, and to make the necessary preparations before they em- barked in designs against the State. They accord- ingly improved and refined by degrees on the measures which they successively took against the Senate; and when the Tribune Sulpicius began to at, he made his arrangements equal to a system of formal war. This Tribune, according to Plu- tarch, had three thousand gladiators in his pay, and in despite of the law of Plautius, had ever at his back a numerous company of retainers, armed with daggers and other offensive weapons; these he called his Anli-fenate; and retained to support him in an attempt, which he was at no pains to disguise, against the authority of the Senate itself. He moved the People to recal from exile all those who had fled from the city on occasion of the for- mer disorders, and to admit the new citizens and enfranchised slaves to be enrolled promiscuously in all the Tribes without regard to the late wife limita- of the Senate decree, by which they were firidted to four. By the change which he now posed, the citizens of least consideration might come to have a majority, or a great sway in the public deliberations. The Tribunes would come masters in every question, and fill up the rolls of the people in the manner that most suited their interest.
This presumptuous man himself undertook to cure the freedom of the city for every person that applied to him, and boldly received premiums in
the
Bo the fireets for this prostitution of the privileges and
 powers of his fellow-citizens."
"The more refpeaable citizens, and the magif. trates, in vain withstood these abuses. They were overpowered by force, and frequently driven from the place of assembly. 'In this extremity they had recourse to superstition, and by multiplying holy- days, endeavoured to flop or to disconcert their antagonifis. But Sulpicius, with his party, laid violent hands on the Consuls, in order to force them to recal these appointments. Young Pompey, the son of the present Consul, and fon-in-law to Sylla, as killed in the fray. Sylla himself, who had ithdrawn from the tumult, feeling that he was in the power of his enemies, and being impatient to get into a situation in which he could more effectu- ally resist them, chore for the present to comply with their demands  ."
"In the midst of there violences, the city being under an actual usurpation or tyranny, Sylla paired to the army in Campania, with a resolution to pursue the objet of his command in Asia, and to leave the Tribunitian florms at Rome to spend their force. But soon after his departure, it ap- peared, that Marius was no firanger to the councils of Sulpicius; and that he hoped, by means of this Tribune, to gratify an ambition which outlived the vigour of his faculties and the firength of his body. His firfi obje was to mortify his rival Sylia, in revoking, by a decree of the People, the appointment of the Senate, and to supersede him in the command of the army againfi Mithridates. A decree to this purpose was accordingly with ease obtained by Sulpicius, in one of those partial ventions, which took upon them to represent the People of Italy in the fireets of Rome; and Ma- rius, now appointed general of the army in Cam-"
"  Plutarch. in Mario,  5z6. edit. Londin. 4to."
"pania,"
"pania, sent the proper officers to intimate his ap A  pointment to Sylla, and to receive from him, in . behalf of his successor, the charge of the army, and the delivery of the itores. Sylla had the  dress to make the troops apprehend that this change was equally prejudicial to them as to him- self; that Marius had his favourite legions whom he would naturally employ; and that the fame act of violence, by which he had supplanted the general, would bring other officers and other men to reap the fruits of this lucrative service in Asia. This persuasion, as well as the attachment which the army already 'bore to their general, produced its effet  ."
"The officers, who intimated the appointment of Marius, on declaring their commiflion, found that violence could take place.in the camp as well as in the city. Their orders were received with scorn. A tumult arose among the foldiecs; and citizens vefied with a public character, formally commilfi- oned to intimate an order of the Roman People, and delivering their commands to this purpose, were slain in the camp. In return to this outrage tome relations and friends of Sylla were murdered in the city, and such retaliations were not likely soon to end on either  ."
"Fation is frequently blind, and does not fee the ife that may be made of its own violent prece- dents againlt itself. Although Sylla is said to have hesitated, yet he was not a person likely to shrink from the contest, in which his own enemies, and those of the State, had engaged him. Stung with rage, and probably thinking that force would be juitified in snatching the republic out of luch  olent hands, he proposed to the army that they should march to Rome. The proposal was re-"
"  Appian. Bell. Civil.  i. ( Plularch. in Mario, Edit. Lond.  526."
"ceived"
"B O ceived with joy; and the army, without any of the"
"I!. scruples, or any degree of that hesitation which is '~-~ascribed to their commander in adopting this
measure, followed where he thought proper to lead them.
On this new and dangerous appearance of things, not only Marius and Sulpicius, with the persons most obnoxious on account of the insults offered to Sylla and other refpetable citizens, were seized with consternation; but even the Senate and the Nobles werejulfly alarmed.
A faction, it is true, had assumed the authority of the Roman People, to violate the laws, and to overawe the State; but armies, it was thought, are dangerous tools in political contefis; and no good intention on the part of their leaders, no magnani- mity or moderation in the execution of their tentions, can compensate the ruinous tendency of a precedent which brings force to be employed as an ordinary resource in political divisions. Even the present slate of the republic did not appear so  fperate as to justify such a measure.
The Senate accordingly sent a deputation to Sylla with entreaties, and with commands, that he would not advance to the city. This deputation was received by him within a few miles of the gates. He heard the remonstrance that was made to him with patience, and seemed to be moved. He gave orders, in the hearing of the deputies, that the army should halt; sent the proper officers to mark our a camp, and suffered the commifli- oners to return to their employers, full of the per- suasion that he was to comply with their requeit. But as soon as he thought this intelligence had reached the city, and had lulled his antagonifis into a fate of security, he sent a detachment close on the heels of the deputies, with orders to seize the nearest gate; and he himself, with the whole army, speedily followed to support them.
The
The gate was accordingly seized. The People, A  in tumult, endeavoured to recover it; Marius fe- . cured the Capitol, and summoned every man, whether freemen or slaves, to repair to his fRandard. His party, as they afferbled, were drawn up in the streets. Sylla, in the mean time, at the head of his army, rushed through the gate, which his van- guard still maintained, against the multitudes.by whom they were pressed. He was greatly annoy- from the battlements and windows as he passed, and might have been repulsed by the forces which Marius had assembled, if he had not commanded the city to be set on fire, in order to profit by the confusion into which the People were likely to be thrown in avoiding or extinguishing the flames. By this expedient he drove Marius from all the stations he had occupied, forced him to abandon the city, and obliged his adherents to separate.
While the army was difiributed in different quar- ters of a city, deformed with recent marks of bloodshed and fire, their general assembled the Se- nate, and desired them to deliberate on the present slate of affairs. Among the measures he suggested on this occasion, was a law by which Marius, with his son, and twelve of his faAion, who had fccret. themselves, were declared enemies of their country. This sentence was accompanied with a public injun to seize or kill them wherever they could be found. The reasons upon which this of attainder was granted were, that they had violated the laws of the republic, and reduced the slaves to desert from their maiters, and to take arms against the State  .
While the officers of juflice were dispersed in execution of this decree, and many others were   Appian. Bell. Civil.  i.  387. The namer mrnlion in this a& of attainder or outlawry, were Sulplci., Marius' father and Ton,  Cethegus, Junius Brutu-, LCniun andl Iub. (ranii, Albinovanu,, Marcus Suetonius.
bury O bufl in search of their private enemies, thus laid at
i'- their mercy, the Tribune Sulpicius, having fled to
the marshes on the coast near Laurentum, was dragged from thence and slain, His head, fe- vered from the body, as that of a traitor, who had surpassed every leader of faction in the outrages done to the laws and the government of his coun- try, was exposed on one of the rostra; an ex- ample afterwards frequently imitated, and which, though it could not make any addition to the evil of the times, became an additional expreffi- on of the animosity and rancour of parties against each other  .
Marius, upon his expulsion from Rome, retired to his own villa at Salonium; and, being unpro- vided for a longer flight, sent his son to the farm of one Mutius, a friend in the neighbourhood, to procure what might be necefary for a voyage by sea. The young man was discovered at this place, and narrowly escaped in a waggon loaded with itraw, which, the better to deceive his pursuers, was ordered to take the road to Rome. The father fled to Oflia, and there embarked on board a vessel which was provided for him by Numerius, who had been one of his partisans in the late troubles. Having put to sea, he was forced by firess of weather to Circeii, there landed in want of every neceliary, and made himself known to some herdsmen, of whom he implored relief. Being formed of the parties that were abroad in pursuit of him, he concealed himself for the night in a neighbouring wood. Next day, as he was within a few miles of the town of Minturnae, he was alarmed at the fight of some horsemen, ran with all the speed he could make to the shore, and, with much difficulty, got on board of a boat which was pafling. The persons with whom he thus took () Vc:iius Patcrculus,    19.
fuge
fuge relifted the threats and importunities of thec A  pursuers to have him delivered up to them, or  thrown into the sea; but having rowed him to a supposed place of safety, at the mouth of the Liris, they put him on shore, and left him to his fate. Here he first took refuge in a cottage, afterwards under a hollow bank of the river, and, last of all, on hearing the tread of the horsemen, who frill pursued him, he plunged himself to the chin in the marsh; but, though concealed by the reeds and the depth of the water, he was discovered and dragged from thence all covered with mud. He was carried to Minturnae, and doomed by the ma- giftrates of the place to susser the execution of the sentence which had been denounced againit him- felfand his parlizans at Rome. He was, however, by some connivance, allowed to escape from hence, again put to sea, and, at the island ]Enaria, joined some associates of his flight. Being after- wards obliged to land in Sicily for a supply of water, and being known, he narrowly escaped with the loss of rome of the crew that navigated his vessel. From thence he arrived on the coast of As- rica; but, being forbid the province by the Pretor Sextilius, continued to ihift his abode among the islands or places of retirement on the coall  .
Marius was in his seventieth year when he made this attempt to overturn the Roman republic by means of popular tumults, and when he firove to obtain the command of an army in the busiest and most arduous service which the Roman empire had then to offer. Being forced, by his miscarriage in this attempt, into the state of an outlaw, he fill ariused the world with adventures and escapes, which historians record with the embellishments of a pifturefque and even romantic description. A Gaulish or German soldier, who was employed at
  Plutarch. in Mario, edit. Lond,  534,
Minturns o Minturne to put him to death, overawed by his a,. aipet, recoiled from the talk; and the people of
the place, as if moved by the miracle, concurred in aiding his escape (i). The presence of such an exile on the ground where Carthage had flood, was supposed to encreafe the majesty and the melan- choly of the scene.  Go, he said to the LiCor who brought him the orders of the Prator to  part,  tell him that you have seen Marius fitting  on the ruins of Carthage  ."
"The Senate, thus reflored to its authority, and, by the fupprefiion of the late sedition, masters of the city, took the proper measures to prevent, for the future, such violations of order introduced for popular government. They resolved that no question of legislation should be agitated in the as- fembly of the Tribes (1); and Sylla, before he left the city, thought proper to dispatch the election of Consuls for the following year, but did not em- ploy the power, which he now poffefled, to make the choice fall on persons who were both of the senatorian party. Together with Octavius, who had the authority of the Senate at heart, he suffered Cinna, though of the opposite faction, to be chosen, and only exated a promise from him not to difiurb the public peace, nor, in his absence, to attempt any thing derogatory of his own honour  ."
"Having in this manner restored the common- wealth, Sylla fCt out with his army for their deflina- in Greece. Quintus Rufus, the other Confll of the preceding year, at the fame time repaired to his province in the country of the Marfi, where, as has been mentioned, he was to succeed Cn. Strabo in the command of some legions; but iens agreeable to these troops than his predecef-"
"(!}) .!lus Pz-  !  iC.  19. (A) Plutarch. in Mario. (;i/ A   Ec:!. Ci-iil.  i. ( i-. i,. i ; 13' ,  iii.  .  Appian. Bell. Civil,  i."
"for,"
"for, the soldiers mutinied upon his arrival, and putc A  him to death. Cn. Strabo, though fufpeted of  having connived with them in this horrid tranfadi- on, was permitted to profit by it in keeping his station. So quick was the succession of crimes which difireffed the republic, that one disorder es- caped with impunity, under the more atrocious es- sects of another which followed it."
"When Sylla was about to depart from the city   666. Virgilius, one of the Tribunes, moved an im : cor peachment againfi him for the illegal steps he had oaavius, lately taken. But the ltate of the war with Mithri ' dates was urgent, and Sylla took the benefit of the law of Memmius, by which persons named to command had a privilege to decline answer- any charge which should be brought against them, when going on the service to which they were appointed.
The king of Pontus, notwithlfancling he had been disappointed in his attempt upon Rhodes, was become mailer of the Lesser Asia, had fixed his residence at Pergamus, and employed his offi- cers, with numerous fleets and armies, to carry on the war in different quarters, making rapid acqui- fitions at once on the of the Scythian and Thracian Bosphorus in Macedonia and in Greece. His general, Archelaus, had reduced most of the Greek islands, and was hafiening to make himself master of the Grecian continent. Delos had volted, and thrown off the yoke of Athens, at the time that it fell into the hands of this general. The king proposed to make use of it as a decoy to bring the Athenians themselves under his power. For this purpose he pretended a desire to restore the island, with the treasure he had seized there, to its former maflers; and sent Ariftion, a native of Athens, but now an officer in his own service, with an escort of two thousand men, to deliver this treasure into their hands. Ariflion being, un-
der o der this pretence, received into the Pyreus, conti-
IL nued to hold this place, with the city of Athens it- \"'afelf, for Mithridates, and, by means of the forces he"
"assembled in Attica, soon after over-ran Beotia, Achaia, and Laconia."
"To there powerful encroachments on the Ro- man territory, and to the personal injuries done to such of their generals as had fallen into his hands, Mithridates had joined a barbarous outrage, that roused, in the highest degree, the resentment of the Roman People. He had sent orders to all his commanders in every town and fiation in Asia, on a day fixed, to begin a massacre of the Roman citizens that were any where fettled in that coun- try, and to publish a reward for the slaves of any Roman who should succeed in deitroying their mailer. This order was executed with marks of insult, in which the infiruments of cruelty are often apt to exceed their infirutions. It is parti- cularly mentioned, that at Ephesus, Pergamus, and other cities of Asia, intire families, taking fuge in the temples, and embracing the altars, sants with their parents, and without dilinftion of sex or age, were dragged from thence and murdered. The number of persons that perished in this massacre, if ever known, is no where men- tioned  ."
"The resentment which was natural on this oc- canfon, together with the real danger that threatened the empire, fully justified the contempt with which Sylla treated the impeachment of Virgilius, and the celerity with which he left the city of Rome. Having transported to Dyrachium an army of fix legions, he took the route of Thessaly and ]Etolia; and having raised in there countries contributions for the pay and subsistence of his army, he ceived the submission of the Beotians, who had"
"  Appian. Bell. Mithrida  Se5, 586."
"lately"
"lately been obliged to declare for Mithridates, and A  advanced to Athens, where Ariflion in the city,  and Archelaus in the Pyrseus, were prepared to  make a vigorous resistance. Mithridates, who was mafler of the sea, collected together all the troops which he had distributed in the islands, and ordered a great reinforcement from Asia to form an army on the of Beotia for the relief of Athens.
Sylla, to prevent the enemy, haltened the siege of this place. He firfi made an attempt to force his way into the Pyrxeus by scaling the walls; but being repulsed, had recourse to the ordinary means of attack. He ereEted towers, and raising them to the height of the battlements, got upon the fame level with the besieged, and plied his mifliles from thence. He shook the walls with battering en- gines, or undermined them with galleries, and made places of arms for his men, near to where he expeced to open a breach. But the defence of the place was vigorous and obitinate, and so well conducted, that he was obliged, after many fruit- less efforts, to turn the siege into a blockade, and to await the effects of famine, by which the city gan already to be pressed.
It was in a little time brought to the last extre- mity. Those who were confined within the walls had consumed all the herbage, and killed all the animals that were to be found in the place; they were reduced to feed on the implements of leather, or other materials that could be turned into sus- tenance, and came at last to prey upon the car- cafes of the dead. The garrison was greatly di- minifhed in numbers; and of those who remain-  the greater part was dispirited and weak: but Arifion, expecing for himself no quarter from the Roman general, still ffowed no desire to capitu- late; when Sylla, knowing the weak irate to which the besieged were reduced, made a vigo-
rous 0 rous effort, itormed and forced the walls with  great slaughter. Ariftion, who had retired into - the Acropolis, was soon afterwards takern and
slain.
Archelaus, likewise greatly distressed in the Py- raeus, found means to escape by water, and haflen- to join the army that was forming on the of Thessaly; leaving the pofR he abandoned to fall into the hands of Sylla, who rated its fortifications to tha ground.
The army of Mithridates advanced into Beotia. Every part of it was sumptuously provided with all that was necerfary for fubfifience or parade. There was a numerous cavalry richly caparisoned; an Infantry of every description, variously armed, some to use miffliie weapons, others to engage in close fight; a large train of armed chariots, which, being winged with scythes, threatened to sweep the plains. The whole army amounted to about an hundred and twenty thousand men. But their mafier, with all his ability, it appears, relied, in the manner of barbarous nations, more on their numbers than he did on their order, or on the duc& of their officers. Sylla was to oppose them with thirty thousand men.
On this inferior enemy Archelaus continually pressed with all his forces, and endeavoured to bring on a general action, which Sylla cautiously avoided; waiting for an opportunity that might deprive the enemy of the advantage they had in the superiority of their numbers. The armies both in Beotia, Archelaus inadvertently took poll near Cheronea, on the ascent of a steep hill that was formed into terraces by ledges of rocks, and which terminated at lafi in a peak or narrow summit. On the face of this hill he had crowded his infantry, his cavalry, and his chariots, and trust- that, although the ground was unfavourable to
such
such an army, it was till inacceflible, and could A  not be reached by an enemy. 
While Archelaus believed himrelf secure in this '-'~ position, Sylla continued to observe him from the post he had fortified at a little diflance; and was told by Come natives of the country, that the hill which the enemy had occupied might be arcended in their rear, and that any part of his army might be safely conduced to the summit. Upon this formation he made a disposition to engage, placed his main body against the enemy in front, and, that he might throw them into confusion by a double attack, sent a powerful detachment, with proper guides, to seize on the heights above their encampment.
The unexpected appearance of Sylla detach- ment in the rear produced the alarm that was tended. Their impetuous deCcent from the hill drove in confusion all who came in their way from thence to the camp. The rear fell down on the fiont. A great uproar and tumult arose in every part. And in this critical moment Sylla began his attack, and broke into the midst of enemies, who hvere altogether unprepared to receive him. They were crowded in a narrow space, and mixed with- out any diflinAion of separate bodies of officers or men; and, under the disadvantage of their ground, could neither resist nor retire. In the centre, numbers being trod under foot by those who crowded around them, perished by violence or sus- focation; or, while they endeavoured to open a way to escape, were slain by each others swords. Of an hundred and twenty thousand men, scarcely ten thousand could be assembled at Chalcis in Eubcea, the place to which Archelaus directed his flight. Of the Romans, at the end of the aCtion, only fifteen men were mifling, and of these two turned on the following day  .
(6) For this fat Plutarch quotes the Memoirs of Sylla.  I. g Archelaus, OO Archelaus, even after this rout of his army, ,__.~~ frill matter at lea, drew supplies from Asia and
from the neighbouring islands; and, being secure in his retreat in Eubca, made frequent dercents on the neighbouring coasts. While Sylla endeavour- to cover the lands of Beotia and Attica from these incursions, Mithridates made great efforts to place his army in that country; and in a little time had transported thither eighty thousand frelh troops under Dorilaus, to whom Archelaus joined himself with those he had saved from the late difafler. The new army of Mithridates, confifing chiefly of cavalry, was greatly favoured by the nature of the ground in Beotia, which was flat and abounding in forage. Sylla, though inclined to keep the heights on which he was least exposed to the ene- my cavalry, was obliged, in order to cover the country from which he drew his fubfiflence and forage, to descend to the plains in the neighbour- hood of Orchomenos. There he took post among the marshes, and endeavoured to fortify himself with deep ditches againfi the enemy horse. While his works were yet unfinished, being attacked by the Asiatic cavalry, not only the labourers, but the troops that were placed under arms to cover the workmen, were seized with a panic, and fled. Sylla, having for rome time in vain endeavoured to rally them, laid hold of an ensign, and rushed in delpair on the enemy.  To me, he said, it is glorious to fall in this place: but for you,  if you are asked where you deserted your  leader, you may fay at Orchomenos. Num- bers who heard this reproach returned to the charge with their general; and wherever they presented themselves, flopped the career of the enemy, and put them to flight. The Roman army at length recovered itself in every part of the field; and Sylla, remounting his horse, took the full advantage pr the change of his fortune, pursued the enemy
to
to their camp, and forced them to abandon it withc A  great slaughter. VIL
After the loss of this second army, Mithridates appears to have despaired of his affairs in Greece: he suffered Sylla to enter into quiet possession of his winter quarters in Thessaly, and authorised Arche- laus to treat of peace.
Both parties were equally inclined to a treaty; the king of Pontus urged by his lofies, and the Roman Proconsul by the slate of affairs in Italy. Sylla, though commanding in Greece by authority from the Roman Senate, had been degraded, and declared a public enemy by a resolution of the People at Rome. An officer had been sent from Italy to supercede him; and a Roman army, inde- pendent of his orders, was atually employed in the province. Mithridates too, while he had sus- tained such losses in Greece, was pressed by the other Roman army in Asia, under the command of Fimbria, who, with intentions equally hostile to Sylla as to Mithridates, advanced with a rapid pace, reduced several towns on the coast, and had lately made himfelfmatter of Pergamus, where the king himself had narrowly escaped falling into his hands. In there circumstances a treaty was equally season- able for both.
Sylla had been absent from Rome about two years, during which time, having no supplies from thence, he had supported the war by the contribu- tions which he had raised in Greece, ]Etolia, and Thessaly, and with the money he had coined from the plate and treasure of the Grecian temples  . The republic, in the mean time, had been in the poffeflion of his enemies, and the authority of the Senate was, in a great measure, suppressed. Soon after he left the city, Cinna, notwithilanding his engagements to Sylla, revived the proje of keep-
  Plutarch. in Sylla & Lucullo.
Ggz 0 the more refpe&able citizens in fubjetion, un.
der pretence of a government placed in the hands ,.~,' of the People.
The dcfignation of the popular party was the fame with'that which had difiinguifhed the follow- ers of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus; but the objet was changed, and the nominal popular faction it- self was differently composed. Formerly this sac- confited of the populace of Rome and of the poorer citizens, opposed to the noble and the rich. The objecs for which they at that time contended, were the distribution of corn, new settlements, or the division of lands. At present the parties consisted of the inhabitants of the country towns lately admitted, or still claiming to be admitted, on the rolls of the People on one  and of the Senate and ancient citizens on the other. The ob- ject to which the former alpired, was a full and equal participation in all the powers that belonged to the Roman People. They were far from being satisfied with the manner of their inrolment into a few particular Tribes, and laid claim to be  mitted without distinction among the ancient citi- zens, and to have consideration and power portioned to their numbeis. In this they were sup- ported by Cinna, who made a motion in their fa- vour in the assembly of the People, and at the fame time proposed to recal Marius and the other exiles of that party from their banishment. The Consul Otavius, with the majority of the Senate and ancient citizens, opposed there propositions; but Cinna was likely to have a powerful support in the new people that flocked to him from the country towns, and in the friends of the exiles. On the day of assembly, multitudes of the new citizens took poffeflion of the place of meeting, and were observed to be armed with daggers or ihort swords. Octavius was attended at his house by a numerous assembly of the ancient citizens?
)vlXo
kwho were armed in the fame manner, and waitedc A  to take such measures as the neceflity of the cafe _ might require. Being told that the Tribunes who had forbidden the queflion were violently attacked, and likely to be forced from the affemb  they came forth into the fireets, and drove their antago- nifts, with some bloodshed, through the gates of thecity. Cinna endeavoured to make head againfI his colleague, and invited the slaves, under a mise of liberty, to his standard. But finding if impossible within the city, that was occupied by his opponents, to withstand their force, he with- drew to the country towns, and solicited supplies from thence. He passed through Tibur and nelle toNola, and openly implored the inhabitants to aid him against their common enemies. On this occasion he was attended by Sertorius, and by some other Senators who had embarked in the fame ruinous faction. Their solicitations at any other time might perhaps have been fruitless; but now, to the misfortune of the republic, a number of armies were still kept on foot in Italy, to finish the remains of the social war. Cn. Strabo manded one army in Umbria, Metellus another on the confines of Lucania and Samnium, and Appius Claudius a third in Campania. There ar- mies confilled chiefly of indigent citizens, become soldiers of fortune, were very much at the difpo- fal of their leaders, in whole name they had been levied, to whom they had sworn the military oath, and on whom they depended for the settlements and rewards which they were taught to expet at the end of their services. They were inclined to take part in the cause of any faction that was likely by the expulsion and forfeiture of one part of the city, to make way for preferments and fortunes to the other.
Cinna distrusted Pompey and Metellus; but hoping for a better reception from Appius Claudius,
he o he repaired to the camp of this general, and had
_ the address to gain'the troops who were under his
command. ,-ius, Mean time the Senate, without entering into
any particular difcuflion of the guilt which Cinna had incurred in the late tumult at Rome, found that, by having deserted his station, he had acu- ally divested himself of his office as Consul; and they obtained the election of  Cornelius Merula in his place.
Marius, being informed that one of the armies in Italy, with a Roman Consul at its head, was prepared to support him, made haste from his exile in Africa: he landed in Tuscany, was joined by numbers, and had an offer of being vested with the ensigns of Proconsul. But intending to move indignation or pity, he declined every privi- lege of a Roman citizen, until the sentence of at- tainder or banishment, which had been nounced against him, should be reverted. In the manner practised by suppliants, with a mean ha- bit and ghastly figure, to which he was reduced by the diflrefs of his exile, he presented himself to the People; but with a countenance, fays his historian, which, being naturally stern, now rather seemed terrible than piteous (q). He implored the protec- of the country towns, in whose cause he too pretended to have uffiered, and whose interests were now embarked on the fame bottom with his own. He had many partisans among those who had composed the legions which formerly served under his orders. He had reputation and autho- rity, and soon assembled a considerable force, with which, in concert with Cinna, with Sertorius and Carbo, he advanced towards Rome.
They inverted the city in three separate divifi- ons. Cinna and Carbo lay before it, Sertorius
(q) Plut:rcb. in Mario.
took
took poll on the river above, and Marius below A  it. The last, to prevent supplies from the sea,  made himself master of the port of Ofia; the first had sent a detachment to Ariminum, to prevent any relief from the of Gaul.
In this extremity the Senate applied to Metelius, iequefting that he would make any accommoda- with the Italian allies, and haften to the relief of the city. The delays which he made in the ex- ecution of these orders, enabled Cinna and Marius to prevent him in gaining the allies. The inhabi- tants of Italy at this time had it in their option to accept the privileges they claimed from either par- ty; and, having.chofen to join themselves with the popular faction- they threw their weight into that scale.
Metellus, however, advanced into Lalium; and, being joined by the Consul Oaavius, took poll on the Alban Hill. Here they found that the troops, being inclined to favour their enemies, deserted apace. Metellus, being reduced to a few attend- ants, despaired of the cause, and withdrew into Africa. Oaavius returned to his station in the city.
The army lately commanded by Pompeius Strabo, was now deprived of its general; he hav- been killed by lightning in his camp. And the Senate was not inclined to repose any confi- dence in his men. He himself had rome time he- fitated between the parties; and the troops, at his death, were prepared to chbofe the which was most likely to favour their interest. With so un- certain a profpe of support, the Senate thought it safer to enter into a treaty with Cinna and Marius, than to remain exposed to the necessity of being obliged to admit them by force. They offered to reinstate Cinna in the office of Consul, and to flore Marius, with the other exiles, to their condi- of Roman citizens; only flipulating that they
would o -: would spare the blood of their opponents, or ceed again them according to the laws of the commonwealth. While this treaty was in depend- ance, Marius, affecting the modesty of a person whom the law, according to his late sentence of banishment, had disqualified to take any part among citizens, observed a fullen and obflinate silence. Even when the treaty was concluded, and the gates were laid open to himself and his fol- lowers, he refused to enter until the attainder un- der which he lay should be taken off, and until he was replaced in his condition as a Roman. The People were accordingly assembled to repeal their former decree. But Marius, proposing to take his enemies by surprise, did not wait for the comple- of the ceremony. While the ballots were col- lecting, he entered the city with a band of armed men, whom he employed in taking vengeance on all those who had concurred in the late measures against him. The gates, by his orders, were fe- cured, but mofi of the Senators escaped. Sylla house was demolished, many who were reputed his friends were slain, others aflifted his wife and his children in making their escape. Among the signals by which Marius directed the execution of particular persons, it was underfiood that if he did not return a salute which was offered him, this was to be confidered as a warrant for immediate death. In compliance with these instructions, some citi- zens of note were laid dead at his feet. And as the meanest retainers of his party had their resent- ments as well as himself, and took this opportu- nity to indulge their pafions, the city resembled a place that was taken by storm, and every quar- ter resounded with the cries of robbery, murders, and rapes. This horrid scene continued without intermillion five days and five nights.
The following are the names of a few of the principal Senators who suffered: the Consul Ota-
viur
vius was murdered in his robes of office, and in A  pretence of his liators; two Senators of the name VL. of Cefar, Caius and Lucius; two of the name of Crassus, the father and the son, who, attempting to escape, but likely to be taken, fell by their own hands; Attilius Serranus, Publius Lentulus,  Nu- mitorius,  Babius, whose bodies, fattened on a hook, were dragged by a rope through the itreets; Marcus Antonius, one of the first Roman Senators, who had betaken himself intirely or chiefly to civil arts, and is known therefore by the name of the Orator; this Senator being discovered in a place of concealment, was killed by affailins sent for the purpose. The heads of the others were exposed on the rofira; that of Antonius was placed on the table of Marius, who bore him, it seems, a pecu- liar degree of animosity and rancour. Catulus, once the colleague of Marius in the Consulate, partner in his lait and most decisive victory over the Cimbri, and without question one of the most refpetable Senators of the age, was included in the warrant for general execution. Marius being Solicited in his favour, made answer, He mniif die. And this vicim, choofing to avo by a voluntary death the insults likely to be offered to him by his enemies, having Ihut himself up, with abrafier of burning coals, in a close chamber which was cently plaistered, perished by suffocation.
Merula, the Flamen Dialis, whose name, with- out his own knowledge, had been inscribed Consul in place of that of Cinna, now likewise, willing to maintain the dignity of his ilation, opened his ar- teries at the shrine of Jupiter, whose priest he was, sprinkled the statue of the god with his blood; on feeling the approach of death, he tore from his head the apex or crest of the order, which, by the maxims of religion, he always carried while alive, but with which on his head it would have been im- pious and ominous to die, and took those who were
present o present to witness of the exactness with which he performed this duty.
Cinna himself became weary of the murders which were committed to gratify the avarice of mean and needy adventurers, or the rancour even of figitive laves against the masters they had  ferted; he wished to terminate so horrid a scene, but it seems could not flop it otherwise than by the death of those who were employed in it. He caused great numbers of them accordingly to be fur- rounded and put to the sword. He proposed, in concert with Marius, to give some form or title to their government, by assuming the Consulate: and although there is no doubt that they could have easily obtained the sanction of an ordinary election, yet they chose to usurp the ensigns and powers of Confu! without any iuch pretence  . Marius, while he took the title of Consul, continued to acf like a chief of banditti, connived at the disorders that were committed by his military retainers, and - continued still to superintend the execution of the orders which he had given on his firit entry into the city, to put his opponents to death.
In the midst of thele crimes, however, the name of Sylla, and the fame of his vicories in Greece, gave continual presage of a just retribution. Ma- rius was agitated with nocturnal fears, and gave signs of a distracted mind. Some one, he ima- gined, in the words of a poet, continually found- in his ears, Horrid is the dying lion den; which being applied to himself, seemed to announce his approaching dissolution. He took to the exceflive life of wine, contracted a pleurisy, and died on the seventh day of his illness, in the seventeenth day of his lait or seventh Consulate, and in the seventieth year of his age; leaving the tools he had employed
  Livy, Epitome,  riil.
in
in subverting the government of his country, to A  pay the forfeit of his crimes. VIE.
Livy, it appears  , had made it a question, whether Marius had been most useful to his coun- try.as a soldier, or pernicious as a citizen. It has happened unfortunately for his fame, that he closed the scene of life with examples of the latter kind. In what degree he retained his genius or abilities cannot be known. His insatiable thirst of power, like avarice in the cafe of other persons, seemed to grow with age. His hatred of the Nobles, tradted in the obscurity of his early life, remained with him after he himself had laid the amplell foun- dations of Nobility in his own family. And he died in an attempt to extinguish all just or regular government in the blood of those who only were qualified or disposed to sustain it.
Upon the death of Marius, the government flill continued to be usurped by Cinna. 'Many of the Senators, and other citizens, obnoxious to the vailing party, took refuge with Sylla. This gene- ral himself was declared a public enemy; his es- feds were seized; his children, with their mother, having narrowly escaped the pursuit of his enemies, fled to the father in Greece.
Upon this occasion Sylla did not change his duEt in the war, nor make any concessions to the enemies of the State. He talked familiarly every day of his intention to punish his enemies at Rome, and to avenge the blood of his friends, but not till he had forced Mithridates to make reparation for the wrongs he had done to the Romans and to their allies in Asia.
Alarmed by these threats, Cinna took measures to strengthen his party; alfumed, upon the death of Marius, Valerius Flaccus as his colleague in   I.ivy, Epitome,   Appian. Bell- Civil.  i. Phl- tarch. in Mario. Florup,  iii . 21. Vellcius Pater.    19,   Dio. Calf, in Fragmcntis.
the o Kthe office of Consul; and, having afligned him the
command in Asia, with two additional legions, trusted that with this force he might obtain poifefi- on of the Province.
But Flaccus, upon his arrival in Thessaly, was deserted by part of the army, which went over to Syiia; and palling through Macedonia in his route to Asia with the remainder, a dispute arose between himself and his lieutenant Fimbria, which ended in the murder of the Conlul Flaccus, and in the fuc- cellion of Fimbria to the command. Sb little  ference or respect did citizens pay, in the disorder of those unhappy times, even to the government they professed to serve.
Fimbria, with the troops he had seduced to his standard, after he had affaflinated their general, made a rapid progress in Asia, and hastened, as has been observed, the resolution to which Mithri- dates was come, of applying for peace. To this crafty prince, urged by the necessity of his own as- fairs, the conjuncture appeared to be favourable, when so much diffraction took place in the coun- cils of Rome. He had experienced the abilities of Sylla; he knew his eager desire to be gone for Italy, and to be revenged of his enemies; and he expeted to gain him by proffering afiifiance in the war he was about to wage with the opposite party at Rome.
Upon a message from Archelaus, Sylla readily agreed to an interview in the island of Delos; and here being told, in the name of Mithridates, that he should have money, troops, and shipping to make a defeent on Italy, provided he would enter into a confederacy with the king of Pontus, and make war on the Romans, by whom he was now proscribed, Sylla, in his turn, propolsd to Arche- laus to desert Mithridates, to deliver up the fleet and the army which was under his command, and to rely for protection and reward on the faith of
the
the Romans. They will speedily feat you, he HAP. said, on the throne of Pontus. Archelaus having vl rejeteed this proposal with horror,  And you, fays Sylla,  the slave, or (if you prefer that title)  the friend of a barbarous tyrant, will not betray  your trust, and yet to me have the presumption  to propose an at of perfidy. The fields of  Charonea and Orchomenos should have made you better acquainted with the characer of the  Romans."
"Upon this reply Archelaus saw the necessity jos purchasing the treaty he was inftrusted to make, and accordingly made the following ceflions:"
"That the fleet of Pontus, confifling of fe- venty Galleys, should be delivered up to the Romans."
"That the garrisons should be withdrawn from all places which had been seized in the course of this war."
"That the Roman province in Asia, together with Paphlagonia, Bithynia, and Cappadocia should be evacuated, and the frontier of Pontus, for the future, be the boundary of Mithridates territory."
"That the Romans should receive two thou- sand talents  , to reimburse their expence in the war."
"That prisoners should be refiored, and all defer- ters delivered up."
"While these articles were sent to Mithridates for his ratification, Sylla in no degree relaxed the measures he had taken to secure and facilitate the passage of his army into Asia. He sent Lucullus   round the maritime powers of the East to assemble a fleet; and, after having made tome incursions into Thrace, to gratify his army with the spoil of"
"  About 386,ool0 . () Vide Plutarch. in Lucullo.
nations O nations who had often plundered the Roman vince, he continued his route to the Hellespont, and was met in his way by the messengers of Mithridates, who informed him that their master agreed to all the articles proposed, except to that which related to the ceflion of Paphlagonia; and at the fame time made a merit of the preference he had given to Sylla in this treaty ; as he might have obtained more favourable terms from Fim- bria.  That is a traitor, said Sylla,  whom  I hall speedily punish for his crimes. As for  your master, I shall know, upon my arrival  in Asia, whether he choofes to have peace or  war.
Being arrived at the Hellespont, he was joined by Lucullus with a fleet which enabled him to pals that strait. Here he was met by another message from Mithridates, desiring a personal interview; which was accordingly held in the presence of both armies, and at which the king of Pontus, after some expostulations, agreed to all the conditions already mentioned. In this he probably acted from policy, as well as from the neceflity he felt in the present state of his affairs. He ifill hoped, in conlequence of this treaty, to turn the arms of Sylla against the Romans, and trusted that the peace he obtained for himself in Asia was to be the beginning of a war in Italy, more likely to distress his enemies than any efforts he himself could make against them. With this reasonable profpet he retired into his own kingdom of Pontus; and there, strengthening himself by alliances and the acquisition of territory on the northern coasts of the Euxine, he prepared to take advantage of future emergencies, and to profit by the irate of confusion into which the affairs of the Romans were hastening.
Sylla having brought the Mithridatic war to an ;ifTue honourable for himself, and having every
where
where gratified his army with the fDoils of theirc Ht A  enemies, being pofremfed of a considerable rum of I money and a numerous fleet, and being secure of the attachment of the soldiers, who had experienced his liberality, and reited their hopes of fortune on the success of his future enterprises  prepared to take vengeance on his enemies, and those of the republic in Italy. He proceeded, however, with great deliberation and caution; and, as if the State at Rome were in perfect tranquillity, flaid to duce the army of Fimbria, to resettle the Roman province, and to effeEt the restoration of the allies, Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes, to their several king- doms of Cappadocia and Bithynia.
Fimbria being required by Sylla to resign a mand which he had illegally usurped, retorted the charge of usurpation, and treated Sylla himself as an outlaw: but upon the approach of this general, being deserted by his army, he fled to Pergamus, and there put an end to his life by the hands of a slave, of whom he exated this service. To punish the province of Asia for its defection to Mithri- dates, Sylla obliged the inhabitants to pay down a fum equal to five years ordinary tax. He lent Curio to replace on their thrones the kings of Cap- padocia and Bithynia, who had persevered in their alliance with Rome, and sent an account of these particulars to the Senate, without taking any notice of the edict by which he himself had been stripped of his command, and declared an enemy  . Before he set fail, however, for Italy, he thought proper to transmit to Rome a memorial, setting forth his services and his wrongs, as well as the jury done to many Senators who had taken refuge in his camp, and concluding with menaces ofjuf- lice againit his own enemies and those of the public, but assuring the citizens in general of (tw) Appian. in Bell. Mithridat. Plutarch, in Sy 
tetion o tection and security. This paper being read in the a_  Senate, struck many of the members with dread-"
"ful apprehensions; expedients were proposed to concile the parties, and to avert the evils which the republic must susser from their repeated contenti- ons. A message was sent to pacify Sylla, and earnest intreaties were made to Cinna, that he would suspend his levies until an answer could be obtained from the other. But Cinna, in contempt -.  6 of these pacific intentions, took measures to prose-   cute the war; divided the fasces with Cn. Papirius Cn' Carbo, whom, without any form of ele  he .:: assumed for his colleague in the Consulate; and, in 2:A ; the partition of provinces, retained for himself the"
"administration in Italy, while he afligned to Carbo the command in the neighbouring Gaul. These titular magistrates, with all the adherents of their faction, applied in great hafle to the raising of men, and securing the fidelity of the towns within the several divisions which they had received in charge."
"Carbo exa hofsages for their good behaviour from all the towns in his difirit; but as he had not authority from the Senate for this measure, he found himself unable to give it effect. To Cafrricius, the chief magifirate of Placentia, a perfcn of great age, who refused to comply, he laid,  Have not I your life in my power ?  And have not I, said the other,  already lived  long enough   ?
Cinna, however, having muflered a considerable force, intended to make head against Sylla in Thelfaly, through which he was expected to pass in his way to Italy, and determined to transport his army thither. But the troops being averse to embark, he himfeif, endeavouring to force them, was killed in a mutiny. A general disorder and
  Vzl. Max.    
anarchy
anarchy infected the whole party. The electionc A  of a successor to Cinna was twice interrupted by ` supposed unfavourable presages, and Carbo mained sole Consul.
At this time an answer arrived from Sylla to the proposals made by the Senate towards a reconcilia- of parties; in which he declared,  That he  never could return into friendship with persons guilty of so many and such enormous crimes.  If the Roman People, however, were pleased  to grant an indemnity, he (hould not interpose,  but would venture to affirm, that such of the  citizens as chore, in the present disorders, to  take refuge in his camp, would find themselves  safer than'in that of his enemy  He had em- barked his army at Ephesus, and in three days reached the Pyraus, the port of Athens. Here he was taken ill of the gout, and was advised to use the hot baths at Adipfus; at which he accordingly passed some time with great appearance of ease, amusing himself with buffoons and ordinary pany, as if he had no affair of any consequence in contemplation. His fleet, in the mean time, sising of twelve hundred ships, coafied round the Peloponnefus, and took on board the army which had marched by Thessaly to Dyrachium. Being apprehensive that some part of the legions, upon landing in Italy, and with so near a profpet of returning to their homes, might desert, or, trufi- to their consequence in a civil war, might come disorderly and distress the inhabitants, he exaAed a special oath, by which every man bound himself, upon his arrival in Italy, to abide by his colours, and to observe the firiteft order in his march through the country. The troops, wishing to remove all the remains of a difiruft which had suggested this precaution, made a voluntary offer of a contribution towards the support of the war; and Sylla, without accepting the favour, set fail with  I. h the o the additional confidence which this proof of at- ^_Ic tachment in the army inspired.
He had, according to Appian, five Roman le- gions, with fix thousand Italian horse, and Liderable levies from Macedonia and Greece, a- mounting in all to about sixty thousand men. With this force he landed in Italy, in the'face of many different armies, each of them equal or fui perior in number to his own. The opposite party were supposed to have on foot, at different fiations, above two hundred thousand men. . 670.  Cornelius Scipio and  Junius Norbanus, scip-,  who were its leaders, being in possession of the Jn -Nor- capital and of the place of elecion, were named
for Consuls. Norbanus, in name of the republic, commanded a great army in Apulia; Scipio, ano- ther on the confines of Campania. Sertorius, young Marius,' with Carbo, in the quality of Proconsul, and others (as Plutarch quotes from the memoirs of Sylla) to the number of fifteen commanders, had each their armies, amounting in all to four hun- dred and fifty cohorts (a); of these different bo- dies none attempted to dispute the landing of Sylla, nor, for some days, to interrupt his march. He accordingly continued to advance as in a friendly country, and in the midst of profound peace. The inhabitants of Italy, confidering the Roman no- bility, in whose cause Sylla appeared, as averse to the claim they had made of being promiscuously enrolled in the Tribes of Rome, were likely to oppose him, and to favour the fation which had for some time prevailed in the State. To allay iheir animosity, or to prevent their taking an active part againfl him, Sylla summoned the leading, men of the country towns as he passed, and gave them assurances that he would confirm the grants, which had been made to them, if.they did not forfeit
  About 5,coo men.
these
there and every other title to favour, by abettinge A iP. the faftion which had subverted the goverriment. .
On his march he was joined by Metellus Pitds, who, as has been observed, after a fritlefs alteript, in conjunftion with the Coriful avius, to cover Rome from the attack of Marius and Ciniini; had withdrawn to Africai and being forced frorii thence by Eabius, returned into Italy. Being in Liuiria, where he till retained the charater of PFrcbhfiul, lBe enideavoured to kee forrie forces' on fddt, arnd to sustain the hopes of his party; wlien fd giret a chanige wa maide in theiir favour by the arrival of the army frnm' Greece.
Syllia wa likewise, ab'ioit the fame tiif , joined by Cneius Pormpeius, fdn to the late' Cordfu Poi- peiu Strabi, who, though too young for any public charaaer, had assembled a coniiderable bo- dy of rmen' to make himself of conseq'uence in the present contest. Being now only about nineteen years of age; he was remarked for engaging man- ners, and a manly afpe&, which procured him a ge- neral favour and an uncommon degree ofrefpet . This diftintion being unf6ught for, was pbffibly confidered by him as his birth-right, and gave him an early impression of that fuperibrity to his felloiV- citizens which he continued: to assume through the whole of his life. He had served in thole legions with which Cinna intended to have carried the war agairit Sylla into Asia or Greece; but, being averse to the party, he withdrew when the army was about to embark, and disappearing suddenly, was supposed to have been murdered by the order of Cinria, a fufpicioi, which, among other circum- flaices; incited the soldiers to that mutiny in which the general was killed. Sylla appears himself to have beer won by the promising aspea of this young man, and received him with distinguishing marks of regard.
(_) Plutarch. in Mario. h 2 Numbers OO Numbers of the Senate and Nobles, who had
- hitherto remained exposed at Rome to the insults .~,'^~ of their enemies, now repaired to the camp of Sylla,"
"The Consul Norbanus, being joined by young Marius, lay at Canufium. Sylla, while he was preparing to attack them, sent an officer with over- tures of peace; there they rejected with marks of contempt. This circumstance had an effect which Sylla perhaps foresaw and intended. It roused the indignation of his army, and in the action which followed, had some effect in obtaining a victory in which fix thousand   of the enemy were killed, with the loss of only seventy men to himself."
"Norbanus, after this defeat, retreated to Capua; and, being covered by the walls of that place, waited the arrival of Scipio, who intended to join him with the army under his command. Sylla marched to Tianum to prevent their junction; and, on the approach of Scipio, proposed to ne- gotiate. The leaders, with a few attendants, met between the two armies, and were nearly agreed upon terms of peace; but Scipio delayed his final content until he should consult with Norbanus at Capua. Sertorius was accordingly dispatched to inform Norbanus of what had pafled, and hostilities were to be suspended until his return; but this messenger, probably averse to the treaty, broke the truce, by seizing a post at Sueffa which had been occupied by Sylla; and the negociation had no other effet than that of giving the troops of both armies, as well as their leaders, an opportu- nity of conferring together; a circumstance which, in civil wars, is always dangerous to one or other of the parties. In this cafe the popularity of Sylla prevailed; and the soldiers of his army, boasting of the wealth which they had acquired under their general, infected his enemies, and seduced them"
"  Plutarch. in Syll. edit. Londin.  83."
"to"
"to desert their leader. Scipio was left almost alonec A  in his camp; but Sylla, receiving the troops who  deserted to him, made no attempt to ceize their -' general, suffered him to escape, and, with the ac- cession of strength he had acquired by the juntion of this army, continued his march towards Rome. Norbanus at the fame time evacuated Capua, and, by forced marches in a different route, endeavoured to prevent him.
About this time, Sertorius, who, before the war broke out, had, in the distribution of provinces, been appointed Propraetor.of Spain, defpairihg of affairs in Italy, in which probably he was not fuffi- ciently consulted, repaired to his province, and determined to try what the genius of 'a Roman leader. could effea at the head of the warlike natives of that country.
The chiefs of the Marian party, who remained In Italy, made efforts to collec all the' frces they could at Rome. Carbo, upon heaiing that' the army of Scipio was seduced to desert their general, said,  We have to do with a lion aned'a so', of  which the fox is probably the more' dangerous ' enemy of the two.
Norbanus, soon after his arrival in the'city, cured an edit of the People, by wihich'Metellus, and the others had whojoined Sylla, were declared enemies to their country. About ihe'.fame time a fire broke out in the Capitol, and the buildings were burnt to the ground. Various fufpicioris were en- tertained of the cafe ; but as no party had any iri- terest in this event, it was probably accidenitl, ind served only to agitate the minds of the People, prone to fuperfition, and apt to find alarririig fages in every uncommon event.
The remainder of the season ,ias Spenf by both parties in collecirig their forces from every quarter of Italy; and the term of the Consuls in office being nearly expired, Carbo procured his own rid-
minatioai o mination to succeed them, and inscribed the name
of Marius, scarcely twenty years of age, as his   671. colleague. This young man is by some said to  rius, have been the nephew, by others the adopted son, CsrPo. of the late celebrated  Marius, whose name had
so long been terrible to the enemies, and at length not less so to the friends, of Rome.
At this time the Senate cofifented to have the plate and ornaments of the temples coined for the pay of the supposed Consular armies. They were, however, notwithstanding this aft of obsequious- ness, believed to incline to the opposite partry, and not to be trusted in cafe the city were attacked. The members being assembled together by orders of the Prztors, Damafippus and Brutus, the most fufpeted, were taken aside and put to death; of this number, Quintus Mucius Scvo!a, Pbritifex Maximus, flying to the temple in which he was ac- customed to discharge his sacred office, was killed in the porch.
The military operations of the following spring began with an obstinate fight between two cori- fiderable armies commanded by Metellus and Carinas. The latter being defeated with great loss, Carbo halfened to the scene of aetion, in order to cover the remains of the vanquifled army.
In the mean time Sylla, being epcamped at Setia, and having intelligence that the young. Ma- rius was advancing agaitift him, put his rrnyin motion to meet him, forced him back to Sacripor- tum, near Prmnelie, where an a&ion soon after en- sued, in which Marius was defeated.
The routed army having fled in difqrder to Prae- nefte, the sirss who arrived ere received intp the place; but as it was apprehended the eneimy., ight likewise enter in. the tumult, the gates 'vere flhut, and many, being excluded,- ere flaughtered.under the ramparts. Marius himself efcapd, by a which
which was let down from the battlements to hoil 9 A  him over the walls. Vl.
In consequence of this victory Sylla invetRd' Prrnefie; and as great numbers were thus ftid- denly cooped up in a town, which was not pared to fubfit them, he had an immediate prof- peEt of feeing them reduced to the neceflity of fur- rendering at discretion. Committing the charge of the blockade to Lucretius Offella, he himself, with part of the army, proceeded to Rome. Me- tellus, in a second action, had defeated the army of Carbo, and Pompey that of Marius near Sena; and the party of Sylla being vicorious in every part of Italy, the city was prepared to receive him as soon as he appeared at the gates. The atizans of the opposite faciori withdrew, and left him iafier of the capital.
Sylla having posted his army in the field: of Mars, he himself entered the city, and calling an assembly of the People, delivered san harhngpe; in which he imputed the disorder of the time to the injustice and cruelty of a few factious.re  who lad overturned the government, and sacrificed the belt blood of the republic to their ambitiora and to their personal resentments. He exhorted all well- disposed men to be of good courage, arid assured them that they should soon fee the republic stored. In the mean time, he gratified his army with the spoils of the opposite party, declaring the effe'ts of all tlofe to be forfeited who had been ac- celfary to the crimes lately committed against the State. After this first specimen of his policy in the city, leaving a sufficient force to execute his or- ders, he hastened to Clufium, where Carbo; being joined by a considerable' reinforcement from Spain, was preparing to recover the metropolis; or-to lieve his colleague Marius, who- Was- reduced to great distress in PrsnefRe.
The o The events which followed the arrival and ope-
.__, rations of Sylla in Tuscany were various, but for
the most part unfavourable to Carbo, whose force, by desertions and the sword, was declining apace. The issue of the war seemed to depend on the fate of Prsnefte, and the whole force of the party was therefore direted to the relief of that place. The Lucanians and Samnites, who had espoused the cause of Marius, and who, by his favour, had ob- tained the freedom of Rome, apprehending im- mediate ruin to themselves, in the fuppreflion of a party by whom they had been prote  determined to make one great effort for the relief of Marius.
They were joined in Latium by a large detach- ment sent by Carbo, under Carinas and Marcius, and made an attempt to force the lines of the fiegers at Pranefte, and to open the blockade of that place. But having failed in this design, they turned, with desperation, on the city of Rome, which was but sightly guarded by a small detach- ment which had been left for that purpose. Sylla being informed of their intention, with hafiy marches advanced to the city, and found the enemy already in possession of the suburbs, and preparing to force the gates.
It was about four in the afternoon when he ar- rived, after a long march. ' Some of his officers proposed, that the troops, being fatigued, should have a little time to repose themselves; and that, for this purpose, they should remain on the ram- parts until the following day. Sylla, however, proposing, by his unexpected pretence, and by coming to action at an unusual hour, to surprise the enemy, gave orders for an immediate attack. The event for some time was doubtful; the wing that was led by himfeif gave way, or was forced from its ground; but the other wing under Crassus
had
had a better fortune, put the enemy to flight, and A  drove them to Antemnae. V1.
The action, though thus various in the differentt '-'~ parts of it, became, in the event, completely  cifive. Eighty thousand of the Marian party were killed in their flight, and eight thousand taken. Carbo, in despair of the cause, fled into Sicily. The troops that were blocked up in' Prenefte, having no longer any hopes of relief, surrendered themselves, and the whole party was dispersed or cut off. Marius attempted to escape by the galle- ries of a mine, and being prevented, killed him- self. His head was carried to Sylla, and by his order exposed in the market-place.  That boy, he said,  should have learnt to. row before he at-  tempted to fleer !"
"Sylla being now mailer of the republic, all men were in anxious expetation of the sequel; nor was it long before they had a specimen of the measures he was likely to pursue. About fix or eight thou- sand of those who were supposed to be the vilefl infiruments of the late ufuipations and murders, being taken prisoners in the war, or surprised in the city, were, by his direction, shut up in the circus, and instantly put to death."
"While this horrid scene was acting, he had as- fembled the Senate, at a little distance, in the tem- ple of Bellona; and as most of the members then present had either favoured, or at least tamely sub- mitted to the late usurpation, he made them a speech on the slate of the republic, in which he reproached many of them as acceflary to the late disorders, and admonished them, for the future, to refpeft the legal government and conlsitution of their country. In the midst of these admonitions, the cries of those who were slaughtered in the circus reaching their ears, the assembly was greatly alarm-  and many of the members flarted from their ,feats. Sylla, with a countenance iemr, but un-"
"disturbed,"
"Bo disturbed, checked them as for an inflance of le-"
"- vity.  Be composed, he said,  and attend to ~'' the business for which you are called. What
 you hear are no more than the cries of a few  wretches, who are suffering the punishment due  to their crimes. From this interruption he resumed his subjet, and continued speaking till the massacre of these unhappy victims was pleted.
In a harangue which he afterwards delivered to the People, he spoke of his own services to the public, and of the misdemeanour of others, in terms that struck all who heard him with terror.  The  republic, he said (if his opinion were followed), should be purged; but whether it were so or no,  the injuries done to himself and his friends should
be punished. He accordingly ordered military execution against every person who had been ac- ceffary to the late massacres and usurpations; and while the sword was yet reeking in his hands, pass- great part of his time, as usual, in mirth and dissipation with men of humourous and singular charaters. He deigned not even to inquire into the abuses that were committed in the execution of his general plan. The persons who were em- ployed in it, frequently indulged their own private resentment and their avarice in the choice of vic- tims. Among these, Catiline, then a young man, had joined the victorious party; and he plunged, with a singular impetuosity, into the midst of a form which now overwhelmed a part of the city. He is said, among other persons to whom he bore an aversion, or whose effects he intended to seize, to have murdered his own brother, with firange circumfiances of cruelty and horror."
"While these dreadful murders, mixed with many examples of a just execution, were perpe- trated, a young man,  Metellus, had the courage to address himself to Sylla in the Senate,"
"and"
"and desired he would make known the extent ofc A  his design, and how far these executions were to be V1, carried ?  We intercede not, he said,  for the condemned; we only intreat that you would  lieve out of this dreadful slate of uncertainty all"
"those whom in reality you mean to spare. Sylla, without being offended at this freedom, .pu.lifhed a lift of those he had doomed to deftruc- tipn, offering a reward of two talents for the head of each, and denouncing severe penalties againit ,eery person who should harbour or conceal them. Hence arose the pra'tice of publishing lifts of the persons to be marfacred, which, under the odious name of profcriptiol, was afterwards imitated with .,  fatal effects inthe :subsequent vulfions of the State.
The present proscription, although it promised some security to all who were not comprehended in the fatal lift, dpened a scene, in some refpe  more dreadful than that which had been formerly acted in this nmaffacre. The. hands of servants were hired against their masters, and. even those of children against their parents. The mer.cenary of .every denomination were encour.age  hy; a, great premium, to conmit. what before only the. ministers gf'public justice thought themselves entitled to per- form; apd, there followed a scene, in, which human nature had full. scope to. exert all: the evil of which it'is susceptible, treachery, ingratitu  difiruft, malice, and revenge,; and would- have. retained. no claim to our efteern or commiseration, if its cha- rafter had not been redeemed by contrary frances of fidelity, generosity., and courage, played by those who,. to preferv :theirfriends and benefagtors, or even to preserve, frangers, who took refuge under their prqteaion, hazarded all the dangers with which the proscribed themselves were threatened."
"ln"
"o In consequence of there measures, about five"
"__thousand persons of consideration were put to"
"death, among whom were reckoned forty Se- nators, and sixteen hundred of the Equestrian order."
"From these beginnings the Romans had reason to apprehend a tyranny, more sanguinary perhaps than any that ever afflicted mankind.  If in the , field you flay all who are found in arms against  you, said Catulus  , and in the city you  flay even the unarmed; over whom do you  poe to reign ?"
"These reproaches were by Sylla received as jests; and the freedom and ease of his manners, as well as the professions he made of regard to the commonwealth, were imputed to insensibility, and to a barbarous dissimulation, which rendered his character more odious, and the profpet of his fu- ture intentions more terrifying."
"In comparing the present with the late ufurpati- ons, men recolleaed, that Marius, from his fancy, had been of a severe and inexorable tem- per; that his resentments were sanguinary, and even his frowns were deadly; but that his cruelties were the effect of real passions, and had the apo- logy of not being perpetrated in cold blood; that every person on whom he looked with indifference was safe; and that even when he usurped the go- vernment of the State, as soon as his personal fentments were gratified, the sword in his hand came an innocent pageant, and the mere ensign or badge of his power. But that Sylla directed a massacre in the midst of composure and ease. that as a private man he had been affable and pleasant, even noted for humanity and candotr  ; that the change of his temper having commenced with his   Probably the Con of him who perifed in the tyranny of Marius. ic) Plu:zrch. in 11."
"exaltation,"
".exaltation, there were no hopes that the fheddingc A  of blood could be flopped while he was suffered to  retain his power. His daring spirit, his address, ' - his cunning, and his ascendant over the minds of men, rendered the profped of a deliverance, if not desperate, extremely remote. The republic teemed to be extinguished for ever; and if the rage of blood, after the first heat of the massacre, appeared to abate, it was flayed only for want of victims, not from any principle of moderation, or sentiment of clemency."
"Such was the aspea of affairs, and the grounds of terror conceived even by those who were inno- cent of the late disorders; but to those who had reason to fear the resentment of the vitor, the prof- pedt was altogether desperate. Norban us, having fled to Rhodes, received at that place an account of the proscriptions, and, to avoid being delivered up, killed himself. Carbo, being in Sicily, endea- voured to make his escape from thence, but was apprehended by Pompey, and killed. All the or- dinary offices of State were vacated by the defer- or death of those who had filled or usurped them."
"Sylla had hitherto ated as malter, without any other title than that of the sword; and it was now thought necessary to supply the defeQ. He retired from the city, that the Senate might assemble with the more appearance of freedom. To name an interrex was the usual expedient for refioring the constitution; and proceeding to elections in a legal form after the usual time had elapsed, or when by any accident the ordinary succession to office had failed. Valerius Flaccus was named. To him Sylla gave intimation, that, to resettle the commonwealth, a Diatator, for an indefinite term, should be ap- pointed, and made offer of his own services for this purpose. These intimations were received as :ommands. Flaccus, having assembled the Peo-"
"ple,"
"'s o Kple, moved for an at to vest Sylla with the title of"
". Dictator, which gave him a discretionary power
over the persons, fortunes, and lives of all the citi- zens.
No example of this kind had taken place for a hundred and twenty years preceding this date. In the former part of this period, the jealousy of the arifiocracy, and in the latter part of it, the nega- tive of the Tribunes, had always prevented a mea- sure from which they severally apprehended some danger to themselves. It was now revived in the person of Sylla with unusual solemnity, and rati- sied by an act of the People, in which they yield- up at once all their own claims to the fove- reignty, and submitted to monarchy for an indefi- nite time. Sylla having named Valerius Flaccus for his lieutenant or commander of the horse, turned to the city, presenting a fight that was then unusual, a single person, preceded by four-and- twenty lictors, armed with the axe and the rods; and it was not doubted that these ensigns of ma- giftracy were to be employed, not for parade, but for serious execution, and were speedily to be fiained with the blood of many citizens, whom the sword had spared. The Dictator, being at- tended likewise by a numerous military guard, in order that the city, in all matters in which it was not necessary for himself to interpose, might fiill enjoy the benefit of the usual forms, he directed the People to assemble, and to fill up the ordinary lifts of office.
Lucretius Offella, the officer who had command- in the reduction of Prenefte, presuming on his favour with the Dictator, and on his consequence with the army, offered himself for the Cofifulate. Being commanded by Syila to desist, he frill tinued his canvas, and was, by order of the Dita- tor, put to death, while he solicited votes in the streets. A tumult immediately arose the Centu-
rion,
riqn, who executed this order againfi Offella, was A  seized, and, attended by a great'concourfe of peo- vlI. pie, was carried before the Ditator. Sylla heard the complaint with great composure, told the mul- titude who crowded around him, that Offella had been slain by his orders, and that the Centurion must therefore be released. He then dismissed them, with this homely but menacing apologue.  A countryman at his plough, feeling himself  troubled with vermin, once and again made a  halt'to pick them off his jacket; but being  molefled a third time, he threw thejacket, with  all its contents, into the fire. Beware, he said,"
"of the fire; provoke me not a third time . Such was the tone of a government, which, froni this example, was likely to be fatal to many who had concurred in the efiablifhment of it, as well as to those of the opposite party.
Sylla, soon after his elevation to the flation of'.  675. Ditator, proceeded to make his arrangements and Decuincn. to new-model the commonwealth. The army  bl, ' appeared to have the firfl or preferable claim to his attention. He accordingly proposed to reward them by a gift of all the lands which had been for- feited by the adherents of the opposite party. Spo- letum, Interamna, Praenefie, Fluentia, Nola, Sul- mo, Volaterra, together with the countries of Sam- nium and Lucania, were depopulated to make way for the legions who had served under him- self in the reduction of his enemies. In there new, inhabitants of Italy, whose prosperity depended on his safety, he had a guard to his perlbn, and a sure support to his power. By changing their dition from that of soldiers to land-holders and peasants, he dispelled, at the fame time, that   Appian. in Bell. Civil. iib. i. Plutarch. in Sylla.   It appears that Livy reckoned forty-feven legions, Epitom.  lxuxix."
"dangerous"
"B o dangerous cloud of military power, which he him- ^ ^,, efelf or his antagonists had raised over the common-"
"wealth, and provided for the permanency of any reformations he was to introduce into the civil establishment. The troops, from soldiers of for- tune, became proprietors of land, and interested in the preservation of peace. In this manner, whatever may have been his intention in this ar- bitrary aft of power, so cruel to the innocent sufferers, if there were any such, the measure had an immediate tendency to terminate the public confusion. Its future consequences, in point- out to new armies, and to their ambitious leaders, a way to supplant their fellow-citizens in their property, and to practise usurpations more permanent than that of Sylla, were probably not then foreseen."
"The next aQ of the Dictator appears more tirely calculated for the security of his own per- son. A body of ten thousand men, lately the property of persons involved in the ruin of the vanquished party, having their freedom and the right of citizens conferred on them, were en- rolled promiscuously in all the Tribes; and as the enfranchised slave took the name of the per- son from whom he received his freedom, these new citizens became an acceflion to the family of the Cornelii, and in every tumult were likely to be the sure partisans of Sylla, and the abet- tors of his power. They had received a free- dom which was connected with the permanency of his government, and foresaw, that, if the leaders of the opposite party, in whose houses they had served, should be restored, they them- selves must return into the condition of slaves; and they accordingly became an additional fecu- rity to the government which their patron was about to establish."
"So"
"So far Sylla seemed to intend the security ofc A pR his own person, and the liability of his govern- ,-- ment; but in all his subsequent inflitutions, he had a view to reftdre the arifiocracy in its legis- lative and judicative capacity, to provide a proper supply of officers for conducting the accumu- lated affairs of the commonwealth, to furnilh hands for every department, and to guard against the growing depravity of the times, by extend- and securing the execution of the laws. He began with filling up the rolls of the Senate which had been greatly reduced by the war, and by the sanguinary policy of the parties who had prevailed in their turns. He augmented the number of this body to five hundred; taking the new members from the Equefirian order, but ' leaving the choice of them to the People."
"The legislative power of the Senate, and theLexde  judicative power of its members were reftored.dicii'. The law that was provided for the last of these purposes confifled of different clauses. By the first clause it was enacted, that none but Senators, or those who were intitled to give their opinion in the Senate  , should be put upon any jury or lift of the judges  . By the second, that, of the judges so feleted, the parties should not be allowed to challenge or reject above three."
"By a third clause it was provided, that judg- ment, in trials at law, should be given either by ballot, or openly, at the option of the defen- dant; and by a separate regulation, that the nomination of officers to command in the provin- ces, with the title of Proconsul, should be commit- ted to the Senate.   All the officers of State, even before they were put upon the rol  were intitled to speak in the Senate.   Tacit. Anal.  xi. Cic. pro Cliento.  I. I During"
"B OOK During the late tribunitian usurpation, the ^ ,' whole legislative and executive power had, under"
"pretence of veiling those prerogatives in the as- fembly of the Tribes, been seized by the Tri- bunes. But Sylla restored the ancient form of assembling the People by Centuries, and reduced the Tribunes to their defensive privilege of terpofing by a negative against any a& of op- pression; and he deprived them of their tended right to propose laws, or to harangue the People. He moreover added, that none but Senators could be elected into the' office of Tribune and, to the end that no person of a factious ambition might chufe this flation, he procured it to be enacted, that no one who had borne the office of Tribune could afterwards be promoted into any other rank of the magif- tracy."
"With refpe& to the offices of State, this new founder of the commonwealth revived the obfo- lete law which prohibited the re-eleftion of any person into the Consulate, till after an interval of ten years; and enacted, that none could be elected Consul till after he had been Qaftiior, .Edile, and Prator. He augmented the num- ber of Pretors from fix to eight; that of Quar- tors to twenty; and, to guard againit the orders which had recently afflited the republic, declared it to be treason for any Roman officer, without the authority of the Senate and People, to go beyond the limits of his province, whether with or without an army, to make war, or to vade any foreign nation whatever."
"He repealed the law of Domitius relating to the election of priefis, and restored to the college the intire choice of their own members."
"He made several additions to the criminal law, by statutes against subornation, forgery, wilful"
"fire,"
"fire, poisoning, rape; assault, extortion, and for- A  cibly entering the house of a citizen; and a flatute  making it penal to be found with deadly weapons of any fort. To all there he added a sumptuary law, of which the tenor is not precisely known; but it appears to have regulated the expence at ordinary   meals and at funerals, and to have likewise fettled the price of provisions.
These laws were promulgated at certain inter- vals, and intermixed with the measures which were taken to restore the peace of the empire. In order to finish the remains of the civil war, Pompey had been sent into Sicily and Africa, and  Annius Lufcus into Spain. In this province, Sertorius had taken arms for the Marian faction; but being at- tacked by the forces of Sylla, and ill supported at first by the Spaniards, he fled into Africa. From thence, hearing that the Lufitanians were disposed to take arms against the reigning party at Rome, he repassed the sea, put himself at their head, and in this situation was able, for rome years, to find occupation for the arms of the republic, and for its most experienced generals.
Soon after the departure of Sylla from Asia, Mu- rena whom he had left to command in that vince, found a pretence to renew the war with Mithridates; and, having ventured to pass the Halys, was defeated by that prince, and afterwards arraigned as having infringed the late treaty of peace. Sylla listened to this accusation, difap- proved the conduEt of Murena, and sent first A. Gabinius, and afterwards Minucius Thermus, to supersede him in the province.
Mean time Sylla himself exhibited a splendid triumph on account of his victories in Asia and Greece. The proceflion lasted two days. On the first, he deposited in the treasury fifteen thousand
  Gellius,    24
 a pondo o pondo of gold (i), and an hundred and fifteen thou- and pondo of silver  ; on the second day, thir- teen thousand pondo of gold (1), and seven thou- sand pondo of silver  . There was nothing that had any reference to his ory in the civil war, except a numerous train of Senators, and other citizens of diffinction, who, having resorted to his camp for protection, had been restored by him to their estates and their dignities, and now followed his chariot, calling him Father, and the deliverer of his Country.   67:. Upon the return of the eletions, Sylla was    C4 . again chosen Consul, together with Q. Cecilius ciil. Metellus. The latter was destined, at the expira- Sp^rt'. of his office, to command against Sertorius in
Spain. Sylla himself frill retained the Ditatorial power, and was employed in promulgating some of the aats of which the chief have been men- tioned.
Pompey having, in the preceding year, by the death of Carbo, and the dispersion of his party, finished the remains of the civil war in Sicily, was now ordered by the Senate to transport his army into Africa. There Domitius, a leader of the op- pofite fa  had erected his standard, aflembled some remains of the vanquithed party, and ceived all the fugitives who crowded for refuge to his camp. Pompey accordingly departed from Si- cily, leaving the command of that island to Mem- mius, and embarked his army, consisting of fix legions, in two divisions; one landed at Utica, the other in the bay of Carthage. Having come to an engagement with Domitius, who had been joined by Jarbas, an African prince, he obtain- a complete victory over their united forces, (i) Rcc'skning the pondo at ten ounces, and 41. aa *ence, this will talke about 60,ao0 I. (i) About a87,5ool. (1) About 50,000ooo. ([=) About 140,03ol. Plin. Iib. xxxiii.initio.
and
and afterwards penetrated, without any refifiance, A 1'. into the kingdom of Numidia, which though  pendant on the Romans, had not yet been reduced to the form of a province.
The war being ended in this quarter, Sylla thought proper to supersede Pompey in the vince, and ordered him to disband his army, serving only one legion, with which he was to wait for his fucceflor. The troops were greatly incensed at this order; and, thinking themselves equally entitled to settlements with the legions who were lately provided for in Italy, refused to lay down their arms. They earnestly intreated their general to embark for Rome, where they promised to make him master of the government. This young man, with a moderation which he continued to support in the height of his ambition, withitood the temp- tation, and declared to the army, that, if they persised in their purpose, he must certainly die by his own hands; that he would not do violence to the government of his country, nor be the object or pretence of a civil war. If in reality he had en- couraged this mutiny, it was only that he might thus have the honour of reclaiming the soldiers, and of rejecting their offer. The ambition of this singular person, as will appear from many passages of his life, led him to aim at consideration more than power.
While Pompey was endeavouring to bring the troops to their duty, a report was carried to Rome, that he had actually revolted; and was preparing with his army, to make a descent upon Italy.  It  appears to be my fate, said Sylla,  in my old
age, to fight with boys; and he was about to recal the veterans to his flandard, when the truth was discovered, and the part which Pompey had ated was properly represented. The merit of this young man on that occasion was the greater, that he himself was unwilling to disband the army be-"
"fore"
"B 0 fore theyfhould return into Italy to attend atriumph,"
"n'. which he hoped to obtain; and that the resolution"
"he took to comply with his orders, proceeded from refpedt to the Senate, and the authority of the State."
"Sylla, won by the behaviour of Pompey on this occasion, was inclined to difpenle with his former commands, and accordingly moved the assembly of the People, that the legions serving in Africa might return into Italy."
"This motion was opposed by  Herennius, Tri- bune of the People, who ventured to employ the prerogative of his office, however impaired, against the power of the Ditator. But Sylla perfitled; obtained a law to authorise Pompey to enter with his army into Italy; and when he drew near the city, went forth with a numerous body of the Se- nate to receive him. On this occasion, it is said, that, by calling him the-Great Pompey, Sylla fixed a designation upon him, which, in the Ro- man way of diffinguifhing persons by nick-names, whether of contempt or refpe  continued to fur- nifh him with a title for life. The times were wretched when armies itated themselves in the commonwealth as the partisans of their leader, and when the leader, by not betraying his country, was supposed to perform a great acion."
"Pompey, upon this occasion, laid claim to a triumph. Sylla at firfi opposed it as being trary to the rule and order of the commonwealth, which reserved this honour for persons who had at- tained to the rank of Consul or Pretor; but he afterwards complied, being struck, it is said, with a mutinous faying of this aspiring young man, bidding him recolle&, that there were more per- sons disposed to worship the rising than the setting fun."
"In the triumph which Pompey accordingly ob- tained, he meant to have entered the city on a"
"carriage"
"carriage drawn by elephants; but there animalsc A  could not pass abreast through the gates. His 'v1 donation to the troops falling short of their expec- tation, and they having murmured, and even threatened to mutiny, he said, the fear of losing his triumph should not affect him; that he would flantly disband the legions, rather than comply with their unreasonable demands. This check, given to the presumption of the army by an offi- cer so young and so aspiring, gave a general satis- fation.  Servilius, a Senator of advanced age, said, upon this occasion,  That the young man  had at last deserved his triumph and his title.
Pompey, by his vanity in demanding a triumph contrary to the established order of the common- wealth, had impaired the luitre of his former ati. ons; by this lalt at of magnanimity, in refirain. the insolence of the troops, he forfeited the as- fedtions of the army; and in both there circun- stances together, gave a complete specimen and image of his whole life. With too much refpe& for the republic to employ violent means for its ruin, he was possessed by a vanity and a jealousy of his own personal consideration, which, in  tail, perpetually led him to undermine its founda- tions.
Upon'the return of the elections, Sylla wasu.  674. again' defined for one of the Consuls; but he ^prAs'ct. dined this piece of flattery, and direaed thediau choice to fall on  Servilius and Appius Claudius. Soon after there magistrate entered on the charge of their trust; the di&tator appeared, as usual, in the Forum, attended by twenty.four litors: but, instead of proceeding to any exercise of his power, made a formal resignation of it, miffed his retinue, and, having declared to the People, that, if any one had any matter of charge against him, he was ready to answer it, continued to walk in the streets in the character of a private"
"man,"
"E O man, and afterwards retired to his villa near Cuma, _:', where he exercised himself in hunting  , and other"
"country amusements."
"This resignation throws a new light on the cha. rater of Sylla, and leads to a favourable conltruc- of tome of the most exceptionable parts of his conduct. When, with the help of the comment it affords, we look back to the establishments he made while in power, they appear not to be the acts of a determined usurper, but to be fitted for a republican government, and for the reitoration of that order which the violence and corruption of the times had fiufpended."
"That he was atuated by a violent resentment of personal wrongs, cannot be questioned; but it is likewise evident, that he felt on proper occasions for the honour and preservation of his country, in the noblefi sense of there words. In his firfi attack of the city with a military force, his adions showed, that he meant to rescue the republic from the ufur- pations of Marius, not to usurp the government himself. When he returned into Italy from the Mithridatic war, the state of parties already en- gaged in hostilities, and the violence done to the republic by those who pretended to govern it, will abundantly jufiify his having had recourse to arms. For the massacre which followed, it may be Ihock- to suppose that the evils of human life can qu!re such a remedy: but the cafe was singular, exposed to disorders which required violent reme- dies, be) ond what is known in the history of man- kind; a populous city, the capital of a large coun- try, whose inhabitants ftiii pretended to in a collective body, of whom every member would be a maFier, none would be a subjec, become the joint sovereigns of many provinces, ready to spurn at all the iniitutions which were provided for the"
"(-} A pi.aa . Cell . Civili. ib. i."
"purposes"
"purposes of government over themselves, and ate A  all the principles of justice and order which were  required to regulate their government of others. Where the gangrene spread in such a body, it was likely to require the amputation-knife. Men rushed into crimes in numerous bodies, or were led in powerful fa&ions to any species of evil which suited their demagogues. Whatever may have been Sylla choice among the infiruments of reforma- and cure, it is likely that the sword alone was that on which he could rely; and he used it like a person anxious to effect its purpose, not to recom- mend his art to those on whom it was to be prac- tifed."
"In his capacity of a political reformer, he had to work on the dregs of a corrupted republic; and although the effect fell short of what is ascribed to fabulous legislators and founders of ilates, yet to none ever were ascribed more tokens of magnani- mity and greatness of mind. He was superior to the reputation even of his own splendid aCtions; and, from simplicity or disdain, mixed perhaps with superstition, not from affected modetly, at- tributed his success to the effeLcs of his good for- tune and to the favour of the gods. While he flowed on Pompey the title of Great, he himself was content with that of Fortunate. He was a man of letters, and pafled the early part of his life in a mixture of diflipation and study. He wrote his own memoirs, or a journal of his life, often quoted by Plutarch, and continued it to within a few days of his death. A work poflibly of little elegance, and even tainted, as we are told, with superstition; but more curious surely than many volumes corrected by the labours of retired study."
"When tired of his youthful amusements. he sued for the honours of the State; but with so little ap- pearance of any jealous or impatient ambition, that, if he had not been impelled by provocations"
"VOL. I. k into"
"B o into the violent course he pursued, it is probable"
"IL that he would have been contented with the usual '1- ^career of a prosperous Senator; would have dif-"
"dained to encroach on the rights of his fellow-citi- zens, as much as he resented the encroachments that were made on his own, and never would have been heard of but on the Rolls of the Consuls, and in the record of his triumphs. But fortune destined him for a part still more conspicuous, and in which it may be thought, that, although none ever less studied the unnecessary appearances of humanity or a scrupulous morality, none ever more effenti- ally served the persons with whom he was nected."
"\With respect to such a personage, circumfiances of a trivial nature become fubjeEs of attention. His hair and eyes, it is said, were of a light co- lour, his complexion fair, and his countenance blotched. He was, by the most probable ac- counts, four years old at the time of the sedition of Tiberius Gracchus, and seventeen at the death of Caius Gracchus so that he might have perceiv- at this date the effect of tribunitian seditions, and !taken the impressions from which he acted againf: them. He served the office of Qguafor un- der Mar:us in Africa at thirty-one; was Consul for the sirs time at forty-nine or fifty  ; was Dic- tator at fifty-fix; resigned when turned of fifty- eig ht; and died vet under sixty, irs the year which followed that of his resignation."
"There remained in the city, at his death, a nu- merous body of new citizens who bore his name: in the country a still more numerous body of vete- ran officers and soldiers, who held efiates by his gift: numbers throughout the empire, who owed their safety to his protection, and who ascribed the existence of the commonwealth itself to the exerti-"
"  VeL Pater.  i.,  17."
"ons"
"ons of his great ability and courage: numbers who A  although they were offended with the revere exer- cife of his power, yet admired the magnanimity of his resignation."
"When he was no longer an obje& of flattery, his corpse was carried in proceflion through Italy at the public expence. The farces, and every other ensign of honour, were restored to the dead. Above two thousand golden crowns were fabri- cated in haste, by order of the towns and provinces he had protected, or of the private persons he had preserved, to teilify their veneration for his me- mory. Roman matrons, whom it might be ex- pe his cruelties would have affected with hor- ror, loft every other sentiment in that of admira-  crowded to his funeral, and heaped the pile with perfumes  . His obsequies were.performed in the Campus Martius. The tomb was marked by his own directions with the following characte- riftical inscription:  Here lies Sylla, who never  was outdone in good offices by his friend, nor  in ats of hostility by his enemy (q). His me- rit or demerit in the principal transactions of his life may be variously estimated. His having slain so many citizens in cold blood, and without any form of law, if we imagine them to have been nocent, or if we conceive the republic to have been in a state to allow them a trial, must be confidered as monfirous or criminal in the highest degree: but if none of these suppositions were just, if they were guilty of the greatest crimes, and were themselves the authors of that lawless state to which their coun- try was reduced, his having saved the republic from the hands of such ruffians, and purged it of the vilest dreg that ever threatened to poison a free State,
  Appian. Bell. Civ.  i. Plutarch. in Sylla. (q) Plutarch. in Sylla, fine.
may o may be confidered as meritorious. To satisfy a himself, who was neither solicitous of praite nor"
"dreaded censure, the firong impulse of his own mind, guided by indignation and the sense of ne- ceffilty, was probably sufficient."
"END OF THE FIRST VOLUME."
"l^^~ ^-'^"
