THE PETITION OF THE Grave and venerable BELLMEN (or Sextons) of the Church of SCOTLAND, to the Hon. House of Commons.
Most humbly sheweth,
THAT whereas the Reverend Clergy of the Church of SCOTLAND,
mov’d by that sincere Regard to the Glory of GOD, which has so
conspicuously appear’d in Men of that sacred Character, throughout
all Ages, have applied to Parliament for an Augmentation of their
Stipends:
And whereas the learned Body of Schoolmasters, incited by that
pious Example, and moved by the same Regard to the Glory of GOD,
have also applied for an Augmentation of their Sallaries:
And whereas it has pleas’d the Divine Providence to bless both
these Applications with such assured Prospect of Success: It might
appear strange, if the grave and venerable Body of Bellmen, being also
ecclesiastical Persons, though of inferior Character, should be so
backward in this holy Cause, and so neglectful of the Glory of GOD,
even though call’d upon by this illustrious and edifying Example of
their Superiors.
The grave and venerable BELLMEN, therefore, of the Church of
SCOTLAND, having weighed these Considerations, do now presume to
lay their Case before the Honourable House of Commons; not
doubting but they will meet with the same kind Reception, which is
indulg’d to the Reverend Clergy and learned Schoolmasters.
The venerable BELLMEN beg Leave to support the Petition by the
following Reasons.
That it can be prov’d demonstrably, from Scripture and Reason,
that the Cause of Religion is as intimately and inseparably connected
with the temporal Interests and worldly Grandeur of your Petitioners,
as with any other of these Ecclesiastics whatsoever.
That as your Petitioners serve in the Quality of Grave-diggers, the
great Use and Necessity of their Order, in every well-regulated
Commonwealth, has never yet been called in Question by any just
Reasoner; an Advantage they possess above their Brethren the reverend
Clergy.
That their Usefulness is as extensive as i t is great. For even those
who neglect Religion, or despise Learning, must yet, some Time or
other, stand in Need of the good Offices of this grave and venerable
Order.
That i t seems impossible the Landed Gentry can oppose the
Interests of your Petitioners; since, by securing so perfectly as they have
hitherto done, the Persons of the Fathers and elder Brothers of the
foresaid Gentry, your Petitioners, next after the Physicians, are the
Persons in the World, to whom the present Proprietors of Land are the
most beholden.
That as your Petitioners are but half Ecclesiastics, it may be
expected they will not be altogether unreasonable nor exorbitant in
their Demands.
That the present Poverty of your Petitioners in this Kingdom is a
Scandal to all Religion, it being easy to prove, that a modern Bellman
is not more richly endow’d than a primitive Apostle, and consequently
possesseth not the Twentieth Part of the Revenues belonging to a
Presbyterian Clergyman.
That whatever Freedom the profane Scoffers and Freethinkers of
the Age may use with our reverend Brethren the Clergy, the boldest of
them trembles when he thinks of us; and that a simple Reflection on
us has reformed more Lives than all the Sermons in the World.
That [he Instrumental Music allotted to your Petitioners, being the
only Music of that Kind left in our truly Reform’d Churches, is a
necessary Prelude to the vocal Music of the Schoolmaster and Minister,
and is by many esteemed equally significant and melodious.
That your Petitioners trust the Honourable House will not despise
them on Account of the present Meanness of their Condition: For
having heard a learned Man say, that the Cardinals, who are now
Princes, were once nothing but the Parish Curates of ROME, your
Petitioners, observing the same laudable Measures to be now
prosecuted, despair not of being, one Day, on a Level with the Nobility
and Gentry of these Realms.
May it therefore please, &c.


A LETTER to a MEMBER OF PARLIAMEN, with the foregoing PETITION.
BUCKHAVEN, 27th Jan.
1751.
Honoured and Worthy SIR,
IT having pleased the LORD to visit his sinful People of chis
Church with many and great Tribulations, it was with Consolation
we saw a Kind of PISGAH Prospect opened to us of better Days, by
the Application of the reverend Ministers and learned Schoolmasters
for an Augmentation of their Stipends and Sallaries. And we, having
no less Zeal, in our inferior Station, for the same holy Cause, have also
agreed upon an Application to a like Purpose; which I am empowered
to transmit to you by that Conveyance commonly called by the
Profane, the P 0 S T. For 1 do not find there is any Gospel Name for
it. If it seemeth good in your Eyes, after communing with your Hearc
in Prayer, it would be a Furtherance of this Godly Work, if you would
get printed in the great City a sufficient Number of Copies of this
PETITION, and* order one to be delivered to every Member of the
House, on the great Day of Grace, whereon the Reverend Ministers are
to present their PETITION,
it might, with the Divine Assistance, very
much forward so good a Work, and might be the Cause, that both of
them may meet with the same Success; which I am sure both of them
equally deserve.
Now, worthy and honoured Sir, if you will be the Instrument of
the LORD in this holy Undertaking, I do hereby promise you, in my
own Name, and in that of all my Brethren, that he, amongst us, whom
the LORD will bless with the comfortable Task of doing you the last
Service in our Power, shall do it so carefully, that you never shall find
Reason to complain of him. I am,
HONOURED
A N D WORTHY SIR,
Your Friend and Servant in the Lord,
ZEROBABEL MACGILCHRIST,
Bellman of BUCKHAVEN.

