It is with a sincere Pleasure I inform you of the general Success of your Book. I had almost said universal Success; and the Expression would have been proper, as far as a Book can be suppos'd to be diffus'd in a Fortnight, amidst this Hurry of Politics and Faction. I may safely say, that I have met with no body, that has read it, who does not praise it, and these are the People, who by their Reputation and Rank commonly give the Tone on these Occasions. Lord Mansfield encreas'd his Style of Approbation; and is very loud to that Purpose in his Sunday Societies. I heard Lord Chesterfield and Lord Lyttleton express the same Sentiments; and what is above all, Caddel, I am told, is very happy; and is already projecting a second Edition of the same Quarto Size. You ought to have up more Copies to this Place; tho' I doubt not but you will easily dispose of all those which you retained for Edinburgh.

Lord Shelburn is in the southern Department: I shall have no Difficulty by his means of sending over your Copy to Paris. I had almost forgot to tell you, that this noble Lord, as well as Lord Bute, are among your most zealous Partizans. The last says, that your Book is one of the best he ever read.

Last night, Horace Walpole desir'd me to make his Compliments to you: He has receiv'd your Book, in a Present from you, as he supposes. He gives you many thanks, approves extremely of what he has read, but delays writing you till he has read the whole.

I shall tell you all our domestic Politics, in which there is no Secret. The Ministry on Friday was Sennight lost the Vote of the Land tax by a Majority of eighteen, very unexpectedly both to themselves and to their antagonists. The Country Gentlemen, to save themselves a shilling a pound, and to please the Counties whom they represent joined the Opposition. Every body blames extremely the Measure. Even many of those who voted for it, are frank in declaring their Disapprobation; and some scruple not to say, that if they had thought it possible for them to have prevailed, they would not have been on that Side. But tho' these were unlucky Circumstances for the Opposition, and their Majority had proceeded merely from an Accident, they were extremely elated with their Success; and express'd their Confidence of finally prevailing. The general Opinion of Dissensions among the Ministry encreas'd their Hopes; and as it was universally known that my Patron and Charles Townsend differ'd in opinion from the rest with regard to the Conduct of the East Indian Affairs, they muster'd up all their Force on Friday last, in order to make a Trial of Parties. But it then appear'd that the Difference was only of Opinion, not of Affections. The General & the Chancellor of the Exchequer supported the Measures of Administration and the Opposition did not think proper to call a Vote. But yesterday they thought to have stolen a March on us. They introduced into the House a small Branch of the same East Indian Affair; and had given the Rendesvous to each other. Mr Townsend was accidentally absent: But Mr Conway (and this I tell you from universal Testimony) exerted himself with so much Eloquence and Ability that he retain'd the Majority to the Number of thirty-three. This is thought a great and deserv'd Victory for the present Session; and the Majority, it is believ'd, will be daily encreasing. Sir Gilbert Elliot also spoke admirably as I am told. But Burke did very ill, which I am sorry for. It is pretended, that he rather sinks in Reputation.

Wedderburn is always in Opposition, but rises in Character.

I am not hurry'd with Business. I commonly attend on the Secretary from ten to three; but often read a Book of my own, and see Company there, and have indeed no more Business than would be requisite for my Amusement in this place, while I am not engag'd in any literary Occupation.

I was very sorry to hear by Mr Leechman that you had been ill of late. I am afraid the Fatigues of your Class have exhausted you too much, & that you require more Leizure & Rest than you allow yourself. However, the good Season & the Vacation now approaches; and I hope you intend, both for Exercise & Relaxation, to take a Jaunt to this Place. I have many things to communicate to you. Were you not my Friend, you wou'd envy my robust Constitution. My Application has been & is continual; and yet I preserve entire Health. I am now beginning the Long Parliament; which, considering the great Number of Volumes I peruse, & my scrupulous method of composing, I regard as a very great Advance.

I think you shou'd settle in this Town during the Vacation; where there always is some good Company; and you know, that I can supply you with Books, as much as you please. I beg to hear from you at your Leizure; and am 
Your affectionate Friend & humble Servant

I told you, that I intended to apply to the Faculty for Redress; and if refusd, to throw up the Library. I was assur'd that two of the Curators intended before the Faculty to declare their Willingness to redress me, after which there cou'd be no Difficulty to gain a Victory over the other two. But before the day came, the Dean prevaild on them to change their Resolution, & joind them himself with all his Interest. I saw it then impossible to succeed, & accordingly retracted my Application: But being equally unwilling to lose the Use of the Books & to bear an Indignity; I retain the Office, but have given Blacklock, our blind Poet, a Bond of Annuity for the Sallary. I have now put it out of these malicious Fellows power to offer me any Indignity; while my Motives for remaining in this Office are so apparent. I shou'd be glad that you approve of my Conduct: I own I am satisfy'd with myself.

Pray tell me, & tell me ingenuously, What Success has my History met with among the Judges with you, I mean Dr Cullen, Mr Betham, Mrs Betham, Mr Leechman, Mr Muirhead, Mr Crawford, &c? Dare I presume, that it has been thought worthy of Examination, & that its Beauties are found to overballance its Defects? I am very desirous to know my Errors, & I dare swear you think me tolerably docile, to be so veterane an Author. I cannot indeed hope soon to have an Opportunity of correcting my Errors; this Impression is so very numerous. The Sale indeed has been very great in Edinburgh; but how it goes on at London, we have not been precisely inform'd. In all Cases, I am desirous of storing up Instruction, & as you are now idle (I mean, have nothing but your Class to teach: Which to you is comparative Idleness) I will insist upon hearing from you.

Pray tell Mr Crawford, that I sent a Copy to Lord Cathcart, as he desird.

I beg you to make my Compliments to the Society, & to take the Fault on Yourself, If I have not executed my Duty, & sent them this time my Anniversary Paper. Had I got a Week's warning, I shou'd have been able to have supply'd them; I shou'd willingly have sent some Sheets of the History of the Commonwealth or Protectorship; but they are all of them out of my hand at present, & I have not been able to recall them.

I think you are extremely in the right, that the Parliaments Bigotry has nothing in common with Hiero's Generosity. They were themselves violent Persecutors at home to the utmost of their Power. Besides, the Hugonots in France were not persecuted; they were really seditious, turbulent People, whom their King was not able to reduce to Obedience. The French Persecutions did not begin till sixty Years after.

Your Objection to the Irish Massacre is just; but falls not on the Execution but the Subject. Had I been to describe the Massacre of Paris, I shoud not have fallen into that Fault: But in the Irish Massacre no single eminent Man fell, or by a remarkable Death. If the Elocution of that whole Chapter be blameable, it is because my Conception labord with too great an Idea of my Subject, which is there the most important. But that Misfortune is not unusual. I am Dear Sir

 Yours most sincerely

I have got down a few Copies of my Dissertations lately publish'd at London; & shall send you one by the first Glasgow Waggon. I beg of you to do me the Favor of accepting this Trifle. You have read all the Dissertations in Manuscript; but you will find that on the natural History of Religion somewhat amended in point of Prudence. I do not apprehend, that it will much encrease the Clamour against me.

The Dedication to John Hume you have probably seen: For I find it has been inserted in some of the weekly Papers, both here & in London. Some of my Friends thought it was indiscreet in me to make myself responsible to the Public for the Productions of another: But the Author had lain under such singular & unaccountable Obstructions in his Road to Fame; that I thought it incumbent on his Wellwishers to go as much out of the common Road to assist him. I believe the Composition of the Dedication will be esteemd very prudent; & not inelegant.

I can now give you the Satisfaction of hearing, that the Play, tho' not near so well acted in Covent Garden as in this Place, is likely to be very successful: Its great intrinsic Merit breaks thro all Obstacles. When it shall be printed (which will be soon) I am perswaded it will be esteem'd the best; & by French Critics, the only Tragedy of our Language. This Encouragement will, no doubt, engage the Author to go on in the same Carrier. He meets with great Countenance in London: And I hope will soon be render'd independant in his Fortune.

Did you ever hear of such Madness & Folly as our Clergy have lately fallen into? For my Part, I expect that the next Assembly will very solemnly pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against me: But I do not apprehend it to be a Matter of any Consequence. What do you think?

I am somewhat idle at present; and somewhat undetermin'd as to my next Undertaking. Shall I go backwards or forwards in my History? I think you us'd to tell me, that you approvd more of my going backwards. The other woud be the more popular Subject; but I am afraid, that I shall not find Materials sufficient to ascertain the Truth; at least, without settling in London: Which I own, I have some Reluctance to. I am settled here very much to my Mind; and wou'd not wish, at my Years, to change the Place of my abode.

I have just now receivd a copy of Douglas from London: It will instantly be put in the Press. I hope to be able to send you a Copy in the same Parcel [with the Dissertations].

 I am Dear Sir . . .

 [Feby or March, 1757.]

Pray why did we not see you this Winter? We shall excuse you for no other Reason but because we hope you were busy. But you must not only have Industry: You must also have Perseverance.

I sit down to write to you along with Johnstone, and as we have been talking over the Matter, it is probable we shall employ the same Arguments. As he is the younger Lawyer, I leave him to open the Case; and suppose that you have read his Letter first. We are certain, that the Settlement of you here & of Ferguson at Glasgow woud be perfectly easy by Lord Miltons Interest. The Prospect of prevailing with Abercrombie is also very good: For the same Statesman, by his Influence over the Town Council, cou'd oblige him either to attend, which he never woud do, or dispose of the Office for the Money which he gave for it. The only real Difficulty is then with you. Pray then consider, that this is perhaps the only Opportunity we shall ever have of getting you to Town: I dare swear, that you think the Difference of Place is worth paying something for; and yet it will really cost you nothing. You made above 100 Pound a Year by your Class when in this Place, tho' you had not the Character of Professor: We cannot suppose that it will be less than 130 after you are settled. John Stevenson; and it is John Stevenson, makes near 150; as we were inform'd upon Enquiry. Here is 100 Pounds a Year for 8 Years Purchase; which is a cheap Purchase, even considerd as the way of a Bargain. We flatter ourselves that you rate our Company at something; and the Prospect of settling Ferguson will be an additional Inducement. For tho' we think of making him take up the Project if you refuse it, yet it is uncertain whether he will consent; and it is attended in his Case with many very obvious Objections. I beseech you therefore to weigh all these Motives over again; The alteration of these Circumstances merit that you shoud put the matter again in Deliberation. I had a Letter from Miss Hepburn, where she regrets very much, that you are settled at Glasgow, and that we had the Chance of seeing you so seldom.

I am Dear Smith 
Yours sincerely

Lord Milton can with his Finger, stop the foul Mouths of all the Roarers against Heresy.

I give you thanks for the agreeable present of your Theory. Wedderburn and I made presents of our copies to such of our acquaintances as we thought good judges, and proper to spread the reputation of the book. I sent one to the Duke of Argyle, to Lord Lyttleton, Horace Walpole, Soame Jenyns, and Burke, an Irish gentleman, who wrote lately a very pretty treatise on the Sublime. Millar desired my permission to send one in your name to Dr Warburton.

I have delayed writing to you, till I could tell you something of the success of the book, and could prognosticate, with some probability, whether it should be finally damned to oblivion, or should be registered in the temple of immortality. Though it has been published only a few weeks, I think there appear already such strong symptoms, that I can almost venture to foretell its fate. It is, in short, this —

But I have been interrupted in my letter by a foolish impertinent visit of one who has lately come from Scotland. He tells me that the University of Glasgow intend to declare Rouet's office vacant, upon his going abroad with Lord Hope. I question not but you will have our friend Ferguson in your eye, in case another project for procuring him a place in the University of Edinburgh should fail. Ferguson has very much polished and improved his Treatise on Refinement; and with some amendments it will make an admirable book, and discovers an elegant and a singular genius. The Epigoniad, I hope, will do; but it is somewhat up-hill work. As I doubt not but you consult the Reviews sometimes at present, you will see in The Critical Review a letter upon that poem; and I desire you to employ your conjectures in finding the author. Let me see a sample of your skill in knowing hands by your guessing at the person.

I am afraid of Kames Law Tracts. A man might as well think of making a fine sauce by a mixture of wormwood and aloes, as an agreeable composition by joining metaphysics and Scottish law. However, the book, I believe, has merit; though few people will take the pains of enquiring into it. But to return to your book, and its success in this town, I must tell you —

A plague of interruptions! I ordered myself to be denied; and yet here is one that has broke in upon me again. He is a man of letters, and we have had a good deal of literary conversation. You told me that you was curious of literary anecdotes, and therefore I shall inform you of a few that have come to my knowledge. I believe I have mentioned to you already Helvétius's book De l'Esprit. It is worth your reading, not for its philosophy, which I do not highly value, but for its agreeable composition. I had a letter from him a few days ago, wherein he tells me that my name was much oftener in the manuscript, but that the censor of books at Paris obliged him to strike it out.

Voltaire has lately published a small work called Candide, ou l'Optimisme. I shall give you a detail of it. But what is all this to my book, say you? My dear Mr Smith, have patience: compose yourself to tranquillity: show yourself a philosopher in practice as well as profession: think on the emptiness, and rashness, and futility of the common judgments of men; how little they are regulated by reason in any subject, much more in philosophical subjects, which so far exceed the comprehension of the vulgar.

Non, si quid turbida Roma, 
Elevet, accedas examenve improbum in illa 
Castiges trutina, nec te quaesiveris extra.





A wise man's kingdom is his own breast; or, if he ever looks farther, it will only be to the judgment of a select few, who are free from prejudices, and capable of examining his work. Nothing, indeed, can be a stronger presumption of falsehood than the approbation of the multitude; and Phocion, you know, always suspected himself of some blunder, when he was attended with the applauses of the populace.

Supposing, therefore, that you have duly prepared yourself for the worst by all these reflections, I proceed to tell you the melancholy news, that your book has been very unfortunate; for the public seem disposed to applaud it extremely. It was looked for by the foolish people with some impatience; and the mob of literati are beginning already to be very loud in its praises. Three bishops called yesterday at Millar's shop in order to buy copies, and to ask questions about the author. The Bishop of Peterborough said, he had passed the evening in a company where he heard it extolled above all books in the world. The Duke of Argyle is more decisive than he uses to be in its favour. I suppose he either considers it as an exotic, or thinks the author will be serviceable to him in the Glasgow elections. Lord Lyttleton says, that Robertson and Smith, and Bower, are the glories of English literature. Oswald protests he does not know whether he has reaped more instruction or entertainment from it. But you may easily judge what reliance can be put on his judgment, who has been engaged all his life in public business, and who never sees any faults in his friends. Millar exults and brags that two-thirds of the edition are already sold, and that he is now sure of success. You see what a son of the earth that is, to value books only by the profit they bring him. In that view, I believe it may prove a very good book.

Charles Townsend, who passes for the cleverest fellow in England, is so taken with the performance, that he said to Oswald he would put the Duke of Buccleugh under the author's care, and would make it worth his while to accept of that charge. As soon as I heard this, I called on him twice, with a view of talking with him about the matter, and of convincing him of the propriety of sending that young nobleman to Glasgow: for I could not hope, that he could offer you any terms which would tempt you to renounce your professorship; but I missed him. Mr Townsend passes for being a little uncertain in his resolutions; so perhaps you need not build much on his sally.

In recompense for so many mortifying things, which nothing but truth could have extorted from me, and which I could easily have multiplied to a greater number, I doubt not but you are so good a Christian as to return good for evil; and to flatter my vanity by telling me, that all the godly in Scotland abuse me for my account of John Knox and the Reformation. I suppose you are glad to see my paper end, and that I am obliged to conclude with —

Your humble servant,

Your Friend, Mr Wilson, calld on me two or three days ago when I was abroad, & he left your Letter: I did not see him till to day. He seems a very modest, sensible, ingenious Man. Before I saw him, I spoke to A. Millar about him, & found him very much dispos'd to serve him. I proposd particularly to Mr Millar, that it was worthy of so eminent a Bookseller as he to make a compleat elegant Set of the Classics, which might set up his Name equal to the Alduses, Stevens, or Elzivirs; and that Mr Wilson was the properest Person in the World to assist him in such a Project. He confest to me, that he had sometimes thought of it; but that his great Difficulty was to find a Man of Letters, who cou'd correct the Press. I mentioned the Matter to Wilson, who said he had a Man of Letters in his Eye; one Lyon, a nonjuring Clergyman at Glasgow. He is probably known to you, or at least may be so: I wou'd desire your Opinion of him.

Mr Wilson told me of his Machines, which seem very ingenious, & deserve much Encouragement. I shall soon see them.

I am very well acquainted with Bourke, who was much taken with your Book. He got your Direction from me with a View of writing to you, & thanking you for your Present: For I made it pass in your Name. I wonder he has not done it: He is now in Ireland. I am not acquainted with Jennyns; but he spoke very highly of the Book to Oswald, who is his Brother in the Board of Trade. Millar show'd me a few days ago a Letter from Lord Fitz-maurice; where he tells him, that he had carryd over a few Copies to the Hague for Presents. Mr Yorke was much taken with it as well as several others who had read it.

I am told that you are preparing a new Edition, & propose to make some Additions & Alterations, in order to obviate Objections. I shall use the Freedom to propose one, which, if it appears to be of any Weight, you may have in your Eye. I wish you had more particularly and fully prov'd, that all kinds of Sympathy are necessarily Agreeable. This is the Hinge of your System, & yet you only mention the Matter cursorily in p. 20. Now it woud appear that there is a disagreeable Sympathy, as well as an agreeable: And indeed, as the Sympathetic Passion is a reflex Image of the principal, it must partake of its Qualities, & be painful where that is so. Indeed, when we converse with a man with whom we can entirely sympathize, that is, where there is a warm & intimate Friendship, the cordial openness of such a Commerce overpowers the Pain of a disagreeable Sympathy, and renders the whole Movement agreeable. But in ordinary Cases, this cannot have place. An illhumord Fellow; a man tir'd & disgusted with every thing, always ennuié; sickly, complaining, embarass'd; such a one throws an evident Damp on Company, which I suppose wou'd be accounted for by Sympathy; and yet is disagreeable.

It is always thought a difficult Problem to account for the Pleasure, receivd from the Tears & Grief & Sympathy of Tragedy; which would not be the Case, if all Sympathy was agreeable. An Hospital woud be a more entertaining Place than a Ball. I am afraid that in p. 99 and 111 this Proposition has escapd you, or rather is interwove with your Reasonings in that place. You say expressly, it is painful to go along with Grief & we always enter into it with Reluctance. It will probably be requisite for you to modify or explain this Sentiment, & reconcile it to your System.

My Dear Mr Smith; You must not be so much engross'd with your own Book, as never to mention mine. The Whigs, I am told, are anew in a Rage against me; tho' they know not how to vent themselves : For they are constrain'd to allow all my Facts. You have probably seen Hurd's Abuse of me. He is of the Warburtonian School; and consequently very insolent and very scurrilous; but I shall never reply a word to him. If my past Writings do not sufficiently prove me to be no Jacobite, ten Volumes in folio never would.

I signd yesterday an Agreement with Mr Millar; where I mention that I proposd to write the History of England from the Beginning till the Accession of Henry the VII; & he engages to give me 1400 Pounds for the Copy. This is the first previous Agreement ever I made with a Bookseller. I shall execute this Work at Leizure, without fatiguing myself by such ardent Application as I have hitherto employd. It is chiefly as a Ressource against Idleness, that I shall undertake this Work: For as to Money, I have enough: And as to Reputation, what I have wrote already will be sufficient, if it be good: If not, it is not likely I shall now write better. I found it impracticable (at least fancy'd so) to write the History since the Revolution. I am in doubt whether I shall stay here & execute the Work; or return to Scotland, & only come up here to consult the Manuscripts. I have several Inducements on both Sides. Scotland suits my Fortune best, & is the Seat of my principal Friendships; but it is too narrow a Place for me, and it mortifies me that I sometimes hurt my Friends. Pray write me your Judgement soon. Are the Bigots much in Arms on account of this last Volume? Robertson's Book has great Merit; but it was visible that he profited here by the Animosity against me. I suppose the Case was the same with you. I am

I was told by Mrs Home, when she was in town, that you intended to make some researches into our family, in order to give them to Mr Douglas, who must insert them, or the substance of them, into his account of the Scottish nobility. I think that your purpose is very laudable, and is very obliging to us all; and for this reason I shall inform you of what I know of the matter. These hints will at least serve to point out to you more authentic documents.

My brother has no very ancient charters: the oldest he has, are some charters of the lands of Horndean. There he is designated Home, or Hume, of Ninewells. The oldest charters of Ninewells are lost. It was always a tradition in our family, that we were descended from Lord Home, in this manner. Lord Home gave to his younger son the lands to Tinningham, East Lothian. This gentleman proved a spendthrift and dissipated his estate, upon which Lord Home provided his grandchild, or nephew, in the lands of Ninewells as a patrimony. This, probably, is the reason why, in all the books of heraldry, we are styled to be cadets of Tinningham; and Tinningham was undoubtedly a cadet of Home. I was told by my grandaunt, Mrs Sinclair of Hermiston, that Charles Earl of Home told her, that he had been looking over some old papers of the family, where the Lord Home designs Home of Ninewells either his grandson or nephew, I do not precisely remember which.

The late Sir James Home of Blackadder showed me a paper, which he himself had copied a few days before from a gravestone in the churchyard of Hutton: the words were these — ‘Here lies John Home of Bell, son of John Home of Ninewells, son of John Home of Tinningham, son of John Lord Home, founder of Dunglas.’

I find that this Lord Home, founder of Dunglas, was the very person whom Godscroft says went over to France with the Douglas, and was father to Tinningham: so thus the two stories tally exactly. He was killed either in the battle of Crevant or Verneuil, gained by the Duke of Bedford, the Regent, against the French. Douglas fell in the same battle. I think it was the battle of Verneuil. All the French and English histories, as well as the Scotch, contain this fact. This Lord Home was your ancestor, and ours, lived in the time of James the First and Second of Scotland, Henrys the Fifth and Sixth of England.

I have asked old Bell the descent of his family. He said he was really sprung from Ninewells, but that the lands fell to an heiress who married a brother of Polwarth's.

By Godscroft's account, Tinningham was the third son of Home in the same generation that Wedderburn was the second, so that the difference of antiquity is nothing, or very inconsiderable.

The readiest way of vouching these facts would be for you to take a jaunt to the churchyard of Hutton, and inquire for Bell's monument, and see whether the inscription be not obliterated; for it is above twenty-five years ago that I saw the paper in Sir James Home's hand, and he told us, at that time, that the inscription was somewhat difficult to be read. If it be still legible it would be very well done to take a copy of it in some authentic manner, and transmit it to Mr Douglas, to be inserted in his volume. If it be utterly effaced, the next, but most difficult task would be to search for the paper above-mentioned in the family of Home: it must be some time about the year 1440 or 1450. If both these means fail, we must rest upon the tradition.

I am not of the opinion of some, that these matters are altogether to be slighted. Though we should pretend to be wiser than our ancestors, yet it is arrogant to pretend that we are wiser than the other nations of Europe, who, all of them, except perhaps the English, make great account of their family descent. I doubt that our morals have not much improved since we began to think riches the sole thing worth regarding.

If I were in the country I should be glad to attend you to Hutton, in order to make the inquiry I propose. I doubt whether my brother will think of doing it: he has such an extreme aversion to everything that savours of vanity, that he would not willingly expose himself to censure; but this is a justice that one owes to their posterity, for we are not certain that these matters will be always so little regarded.

I shall farther observe to you, that the Lord Home, founder of Dunglas, married the heiress of that family, of the name of Pepdie, and from her we always bear the Pepingos in our arms.

I find in Hall's Chronicle that the Earl of Surrey, in an inroad upon the Merse, made during the reign of Henry the Eighth, after the battle of Flodden, destroyed the castles of Hedderburn, West Nisgate, and Blackadder, and the towers of East Nisgate, and Winwalls. The names, you see, are somewhat disfigured; but I cannot doubt but he means Nisbet and Ninewells: the situation of the places leads us to that conjecture.

I have reason to believe, notwithstanding the fact, as Ninewells lay very near Berwick, our ancestors commonly paid contributions to the governor of that place, and abstained from hostilities and were prevented from ravages. There is, in Hayne's State Papers, a very particular account of the ravages committed by an inroad of the English, during the minority of Queen Mary. Not a village, scarce a single house in the Merse, but what is mentioned as burnt or overthrown, till you come to Whitwater. East of the river, there was not one destroyed. This reason will perhaps explain why, in none of the histories of that time, even the more particular, there is any mention made of our ancestors; while we meet with Wedderburn, Aiton, Manderston, Cowdenknows, Spott, and other cadets of Home.

I have learned from my mother, that my father, in a lawsuit with Hilton, claimed an old apprizing upon the lands of Hutton-Hall, upon which there had been no deed done for 140 years. Hilton thought that it must necessarily be expired; but my father was able to prove that, during that whole time there had not been forty years of majority in the family. He died soon after, and left my mother very young; so that there was near 160 years during which there was not forty years of majority. Now we are upon this subject, I shall just mention to you a trifle, with regard to the spelling of our name. The practice of spelling Hume is by far the most ancient and most general till about the Restoration, when it became common to spell Home contrary to the pronunciation. Our name is frequently mentioned in Rymer's Foedera, and always spelt Hume. I find a subscription of Lord Hume in the memoirs of the Sidney family, where it is spelt as I do at present. These are a few of the numberless authorities on this head.

 I wish the materials I give you were more numerous and more satisfactory; but such as they are, I am glad to have communicated them to you.

 



