The Importance of RELIGIOUS KNOW­LEDGE to the Happiness of Mankind. A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE The SOCIETY for propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE: At their Anniversary Meeting IN The HIGH CHURCH of Edinburgh, ON Monday, January 1. 1750. And published at their DESIRE.

By HUGH BLAIR A.M. One of the Ministers of Canongate.


EDINBURGH, Printed by R. FLEMING, for A. KINCAID, M.DCC.L.

A SERMON PREACHED IN The HIGH-CHURCH of Edinburgh, BEFORE The SOCIETY for propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
ISAIAH xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain: For the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea.

THIS Passage of Scripture is understood, by all Christian Interpreters, to refer to the Days of the Gospel. The Prophet is describing in the Context the Influence of the Messiah's Reign, extending thro' all Nature, and producing universal Happiness. This, in its full Accomplishment, doubtless, is yet fu­ture, and respects some more advanced Period  of the Kingdom of God, foretold in other Pas­sages of the prophetick Writings; when true Religion shall universally prevail, and the na­tive Tendency of the Gospel attain its entire Effect. In the Prospect of this, the Prophet seems to rise above himself, and celebrates those happy Days in the most sublime, figurative Strain of Eastern Poetry. He opens a beau­tiful View of the State of the World, as a State of returning Innocence. He represents all Na­ture flourishing in Peace; Discord and Guile abolished; the most hostile Natures reconciled, and the most savage tamed and reformed. The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb; and the Leopard shall ly down with the Kid: And the Calf and the young Lion, and the Fatling toge­ther, and a little Child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young Ones shall ly down together; and the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox; and the sucking Child shall play on the Hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his Hand on the Cockatrice Den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Moun­tain: For (assigning in the Text the Cause of this great and happy Revolution) the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Wa­ters cover the Sea.

 UPON reading these Words, we must imme­diately perceive the great Encouragement they give to all good Designs, for promoting Reli­gion in the World. When we engage in this Cause, we have the Comfort, not only of be­ing engaged in a good Cause, but also in one that will undoubtedly be successful. For we are here assured, by the Divine Promise, that Truth and Goodness shall at length prevail, and the increasing Light and Influence of Religion prove the Cause of general Order and Happiness. It is a noble and animating Thought, that, in such Designs, we co-ope­rate with God for advancing the Kingdom of the Messiah, and work upon his Plan with all the Force of eternal Providence on our Side. Nor ought we to be discouraged by those un­favourable Circumstances, which at present seem to make against us. Tho' the Ignorance, Superstition and Corruption that now fill so much of the World, have a dark and mysterious Aspect, it is not beyond the Power of that su­preme Being, who brings Light out of Dark­ness, to unravel all those perplexed Appearan­ces, and gradually to extricate Mankind from the Labyrinth of Vice and Error. From the  present State of the World, it is not more un­likely, that the Gospel shall one Day be univer­sally received, and exert its entire Influence on the Hearts of Men; than once it was, that it should reach so far, and demolish so much e­stablished Superstition as it has already done. At the Rise of Christianity, there was as great a Disproportion betwixt the apparent human Causes, and the Effect which has been actually produced, as there is, in our Times, betwixt the Circumstances of Religion in the World, and the Effect which we farther expect. The Sun of Righteousness having exerted its Influence so far, in breaking thro' the thickest Darkness, we may justly hope, that it is powerful enough to dispel all remaining Obscurity, and that it will ascend by Degrees to that perfect Day, when Healing shall be under its Wings to all the Nations. A little One shall become a Thousand, and a small One a strong Nation: I the Lord will hasten it in its Time *.

BESIDES this Encouragement to our Endea­vours for advancing Religion, there is to be observed in the Text, a precise Connection mark­ed  betwixt the Increase of religious Knowledge and the Happiness of Mankind. The Know­ledge of the Lord filling the Earth, is distinctly assigned as the Cause, why they shall not hurt nor destroy in all God's holy Mountain. To this I am principally to lead your Thoughts; as a Sub­ject properly suited to the Occasion of our Meet­ing, and peculiarly necessary, as I conceive, to be inculcated, in the present Times, which seem to be waxing indifferent, more and more, to all religious Principles. Whether Christianity shall be propagated further or not, is treated as a Matter of no great Concern to Mankind. O­pinions prevail, that moral Virtue may subsist, with equal Advantage, independent of Religi­on. For moral Principles great Regard is pre­tended: But Articles of religious Belief are thought abstract Things; remote from Life; Points of mere Speculation and Debate; of very inconsiderable Influence on the Actions of Men. The general Conduct of Mankind, it is argued, will always proceed upon Principles and Views of another Nature; and therefore, religious Knowledge stands in no necessary Connection with their Improvement or Hap­piness. Fact and Experience is alledged for  this. Even amongst many, who would not be ranged on the Side of Unbelief, this loose and indifferent Spirit too much prevails; and hence, the Profession of Religion amongst us is too visibly sinking into Disrepute. How adverse all this is to the Design which the present Dis­course is intended to recommend, needs not be said. How adverse it is to the general Welfare and most real Interests of Mankind, I hope, shall be made evident to candid Minds.

BY the Knowledge of the Lord, is not to be understood the natural Knowledge of God only. It is plain, the Prophet speaks of those Times of the Messiah, when more enlarged Discoveries should be made to Mankind of the Divine Per­fections, and of the Measures of the Divine Ad­ministration, than mere unassisted Reason could reach. Our natural Notices of God and Re­ligion are not laid aside by Christianity, but cleared from Error, confirmed by higher Evi­dence, and carried into a wider Field. In this enlarged Sense of religious Knowledge, to make its Importance to the Happiness of Mankind appear, let us consider Man,

    I. As an Individual,
    AND II. As a Member of Society.

I. CONSIDERING Man, in his single Capa­city, as an Individual, our Inquiry shall here begin, of what Importance it is to him to have just and true Principles of religious Belief. This divides itself unto two grand Branches: With respect, first, to his Improvement; and next, to his Consolation.

1. As to the real Improvement of Man; the Advancement of his Nature in what is morally valuable and useful; the Acquisition of such Dispositions and Habits, as fit him for acting his Part well on this Stage, and prepare him for a higher State of Life and Action hereaf­ter: What Benefit does he receive, in these Respects, from religious Knowledge and Belief? It must be obvious, that all Increase of Know­ledge is Improvement to the Understanding. The further its Sphere extends, the more Ob­jects that are submitted to its View and Con­templation, especially when those Objects are of intrinsick Excellence, the more that under­standing Power, which is the Glory of Man,  is in the Course of attaining its proper Strength and Maturity. Hence Truth is justly said to be the Food of the Soul. But were the Knowledge of Religion merely speculative, tho' the Specu­lation must be allowed to be noble, yet less could be said of its Importance. We recom­mend it to Mankind, as forming their Hearts. Pure and exalted Conceptions of the Deity, such as Religion gives us; ”The universal Fa­ther and righteous Governor of the Universe; ”the Author of every good and perfect Gift; him­self the Standard of unspotted Perfection and Goodness; ”conducting his whole Administra­tion with an eternal Regard to Order, Virtue and Truth; ”ever favouring the Cause, and supporting the Interests of Righteousness, and righteous Men; ”and applying to this the whole Force of Omnipotence, and the whole Art of unerring Wisdom, from the Beginning to the End of Things: ”Such Conceptions of the Dei­ty naturally descend into the Heart; kindle in it the Love of Goodness, and establish a Persua­sion of its being our highest Interest. They give a peculiar Strength and Fortitude to the Mind in the Practice of Virtue; and they pro­mote a chearful Acquiescence in this supremely  wise and righteous Administration, whatever Trials and Sufferings may arise.

ALL the Doctrines peculiar to Christian Re­velation are great Improvements of what the Light of Nature imperfectly suggests. A Dis­pensation of Providence is made known to us, particularly suited to the Exigencies of Man: Calculated for recovering him from that cor­rupt and guilty State, into which, Experience bears Witness that he is fallen, and restoring him to a State of Integrity and Favour with his Creator. The Method of carrying on this great Plan is such as gives us the most affecting Views of the Importance of Holiness and Good­ness, and of the high Account in which it stands with God. The Son of God appearing on the Earth, and dying as a Propitiation for the Sins of the World, that he might bring in everlasting Righteousness *; that he might purge our Con­sciences from dead Works, to serve the living God   ; that he might redeem us from all Ini­quity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works  –. Such a gracious and merciful Interposition of the Creator of the  World, so distinguishing a Proof of his Con­cern for the moral Interests of Mankind, is most proper to warm the Heart with Devoti­on; and adds to the Cause of Goodness the Force of every Motive from Gratitude and in­genuous Affection. These Discoveries of the Gospel have this further Effect, to establish an unshaken Confidence in God. They afford something to the Mind, on which it can lay hold as the Security of its Hope; when, with a Certainty far beyond that of mere abstract Argument, it appeals to Matter of Fact; and is taught to say, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all Things *? Hence the great Encouragement to the Repentance and Reformation of Sinners, from the Hope of Acceptance with God thro' JESUS CHRIST, and from the Belief of a Divine Assistance communicated to the Upright in Heart. Whilst the Government of God is thus rendered most amiable, placed in a Light most encouraging to every virtuous Mind; there is, at the same Time, something extremely awful and solemn in the whole Doctrine of the Redemption. It  naturally strikes the Mind with Reverence for the Divine Law; pointing at some deep Malig­nity in Sin, some dreadful Consequences flow­ing from it, unknown perhaps in their Causes, and in their whole Extent, to the human Mind, which moved the Creator of the World to de­part from the ordinary Laws of Providence, and to undertake the Restoration of guilty Crea­tures, by a Method so astonishing. Hence, Mankind are awakened to serious Reflection. Hence, such Views arise of the Laws under which they are placed, and of the Ends of Be­ing they are bound to fulfil, as give Solemnity to Virtue, and restrain them from trifling with Life: Especially, when to this is joined the Dis­covery of Life and Immortality by the Gospel; the Connection in which this Life stands with a future eternal State, for which we are now under Probation; in a Course of Discipline; which, according as by Divine Assistance it terminates in our Improvement in Virtue, or, thro' our own Misconduct, leaves us in a cor­rupt unimproved State, will dismiss us to lasting Abodes either of Punishment or Reward. This is far above those faint interrupted Hopes, those feeble ineffectual Reasonings, which mere na­tural  Light suggests, concerning the future Con­dition of Mankind. Here we find, what alone can be of any considerable Weight with Men in Practice, ”direct Promise and Threatning, ”an authoritative Sanction given to a Law, ”the Governor revealed, ”and the Motives addressed to Hope and Fear, urged home on the Mind by, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts. Nor are Cir­cumstances wanting to impress the Imagination in the liveliest Manner. The Resurrection of the Body, the Solemnity of a future Judgment, the decisive Sentence, the final Separation, and the everlasting Mansions of the Good and the Bad, are all set forth in strong and affecting Co­lours. In short, a great and magnificent Plan of Divine Administration is in Part opened; and nothing is omitted that may give Mankind the deepest Sense of their being all the Subjects of the moral Government of God.

THE Bounds of this Discourse have allowed me to give but an imperfect View of the great Principles of Religion. From these Hints, how­ever, we may recollect so much of the Christi­an Doctrine, as will be a sufficient Foundation for an Appeal to every impartial Mind, whether  the Knowledge, the real and firm Belief of these Principles of Religion, be not strictly connected with the Improvement of Man; and thereby of the highest Importance to his Happiness. I rea­son now with those who admit, that to be vir­tuous and good is real Improvement and Hap­piness. Let them lay what Stress they will upon Conscience, upon its natural Authority within, and the Force and Evidence of its Dic­tates: Obstinate sure they must be, who will not grant, that the natural Tendency of these religious Principles is to support the Dictates, and confirm the Authority of Conscience; to awaken, on various Occasions, the most useful Feelings; to provide additional Restraints from Vice, and additional Motives to every Virtue. Who dares say, that there is no Case in which Conscience stands in real Need of such Assist­ance, to direct, where there is so much Uncer­tainty and Darkness; and to prompt, where there is so much Feebleness and Irresolution, and such a fatal Proneness to Vice and Folly?

BUT how good soever the Tendency of reli­gious Principles may be, their actual Significan­cy and Influence on Life will still be called in  Question. This Tendency is by various Causes defeated: Betwixt the Belief of religious Prin­ciples, and correspondent Practice, it will be said, that Experience shows there is no neces­sary Connection; nor can the Propagation of the one at all assure us, that proportionable Im­provements will follow in the other. ”This is in Part allowed: As we allow, that Knowledge and Belief admit of various Degrees, before they arrive at that Christian Faith, which the Scrip­ture represents as certainly purifying the Heart. But, tho' the Connection be not necessary be­twixt Knowledge and Practice, I hope it will not be denied, that some Connection there is. Here there is one Avenue to the Heart. If the Tendency of religious Knowledge be good, Wisdom must direct, and Duty oblige us to cul­tivate it. For Tendency will, at least in some Cases, become effectual; in more Cases, proba­bly, than are taken notice of amidst the Hurry of the World. Besides the known and distin­guished Examples of true Religion and Virtue, which, in every Age of Christianity, have shone, more or less, as Lights of the World: How ma­ny may there be, in the more silent Scenes of Life, overlooked by superficial Observers of  Mankind, on whose Hearts and Lives religious Principles have a great and happy Influence? Even on loose and giddy Minds, where they are far from operating their full Effect, their Influence is not altogether lost. Religious Prin­ciples are at least a Clog on Vice in its Career; they stop it from going its full Length; and, tho' they do not entirely reform the Mind, are however the Means of preserving external Or­der, and giving a Check to open Profligateness and Dissolution of Manners. Men, that are now bad, might probably have been worse without them; and the World have suffered more from their Licentiousness. Besides, they often sow latent Seeds of Goodness in the Heart, which proper Circumstances and Occa­sions ripen; when the Reformation of the Of­fender, perhaps, is not so conspicuous to the World, as his former bad Manners have been. From the native Tendency of religious Know­ledge there is Reason to believe, that those good Effects of it are not so rare, as some would persuade us; especially, when we consider it as accompanied with a Divine Blessing. By the Nature and plain Tendency of a Thing, it is more reasonable to judge of it, than to lay the  whole Stress on Observations drawn from a sup­posed Experience, which often is narrow in its Compass, and fallacious in its Conclusions. One great Cause of the Tendency of Religion being often defeated, certainly is, that the Knowledge of Divine Things is not thoroughly imbibed, nor the Belief of them fully received. Were a just Sense and a firm Persuasion of them more general amongst Men, we may rationally hope their good Effects would more extensively appear.

I ADMIT indeed, that mere Knowledge will prove unavailing against the Power of Temper and settled Habits: These, 'tis said, govern the Life of Men far more than religious Belief, and will be too hard for all Principles whatever. Perhaps this is said with Truth. But then we ought to consider, that it is the Nature of Re­ligion to work itself gradually into the Affecti­ons, to acquire the Dominion of the Temper, and so to give Rise to Habits of acting. Hence the Perfection of religious Influence is, with great Justice and Propriety, described in Scrip­ture, by a new Heart and a new Spirit; when the Mind is not involuntarily constrained by  Principle, but Principle forms the inward Con­stitution, and becomes, in a Manner, the same with Temper and Affection.

BUT the actual Influence of Principle and Belief on Mankind admits of further Illustra­tion, from uncontested Matter of Fact. They who hold the good Influence of Christian Prin­ciples to be so inconsiderable, as to render the Propagation of them of no great Importance, will be at no Loss to give us Instances of cor­rupt and wrong Principles having had a great Influence on the World. Loud Complaints we hear from this Quarter, of the direful Ef­fects which Superstition and Enthusiasm have produced; how they have poisoned the Tempers, and transformed the Manners of Men; and have overcome the strongest Restraints of Law, of Reason and Humanity. ”Is this then the Case, that all Principles, except good ones, are supposed to be of such mighty Energy? Strange! that false Religion should do so much, and true Religion so little. ”No impartial Inquirer, sure, can be of such an absurd Opinion. The whole History of Mankind shows, that religi­ous Belief is no inconsiderable Principle of  Action. The Mischief such Belief has done, when misled, is indeed a good Argument to be on our Guard against Error: But, as it is a Proof of what Belief can do, it is an Argument to hope the more from it, when rightly direct­ed. The same Torrent that overflows and lays waste a Country, when put out of its natural Course, enriches the Soil, when it runs in its proper Bed. If it be alledged, that Superstition is the more powerful Principle, by falling in with the weak and corrupt Propensities of Mankind; it may be opposed to this, that Truth has the Divine Blessing, and the Coun­tenance of Heaven, on its Side. Let us always hope well of a Cause that is good in itself, and beneficial to Mankind. Truth is mighty, and will prevail. Let us spread the incorruptible Seed as widely as we can, and trust in God, that he will give the Increase. So much for the Im­portance of religious Knowledge to every In­dividual, in the Way of Improvement. Let us next consider,

2. WHAT it promises in the Way of Con­solation, of Aid and Relief to Man, amidst the Distresses of Life. Here it must be allowed by  all, that Religion triumphs; and its valuable Influence in this Respect, must be a strong Argument to every benevolent Mind, for wish­ing that Influence to be further spread thro' the World. For, without religious Principle and Hope, Man is a Creature miserable and forlorn. He finds himself here a Stranger in a wide World, where the Powers and Operations of Nature are very imperfectly known; where both the Causes and the Issues of Things are wrapt up in much Darkness; where he is quite at a Loss, or at best can form only an uncer­tain Guess, whence he comes; for what Pur­pose he was brought unto this State of Being; and whither he is to go, when he departs from hence. What a disconsolate Situation is this to a serious inquiring Mind! Even tho' it were in a Man's Power to fill up the Hours of Life with perpetual Amusement, void of Care; Life, enjoyed on such Terms, would, upon Reflec­tion, appear poor and trifling: But how much worse, when we consider the real Condition of Man; a Being frail and feeble, beset with vari­ous Dangers and Ills, and exposed to many a melancholy Reflection, when he sees all Things around him so transitory and decaying, and  meets with Disappointment and Sorrow, with Vanity and Vexation, in all the Paths of Life! In this distressed Condition, to reveal to him such Discoveries of God, and his Administra­tion, as the Christian Religion affords, is to re­veal to him a Father and a Friend; is to let in a Ray of most comforting Light upon the Darkness of human Estate. He who was be­fore a destitute Orphan, wandering in the in­hospitable Desart, has now gained a Shelter from the bitter and inclement Blast. He now knows to whom to pray, and in whom to trust; where to unbosom his Sorrows; from what Hand to look for Relief. Certain it is, that when the Heart bleeds, from some Wound of recent Misfortune, there is nothing of equal Efficacy with religious Comfort. It is of Power to chear the darkest Hours, and to asswage the deepest Woe, by the Belief of Divine Favour, and the Prospect of happy Immortality. Here the Mind expatiates with Joy; and, when be­reaved of all its earthly Friends, solaces itself with the Thoughts of One Friend that will never forsake it. These Views have a greater and better Effect on the Heart of a plain, but sin­cere Christian, than all the Refinements of Phi­losophy  have on the Learned. Refined Reason­ings may please and amuse the Mind when it is at Ease; may, perhaps, help to relieve it, when slightly touched with Sorrow; but when it is torn with any sore Distress, they are cold and feeble, compared with a direct Promise from the Word of God. This is an Anchor to the Soul both sure and stedfast. This has given Refuge and strong Consolation to many a pious and virtuous Soul, at a Time when mere Reasonings would have proved utterly unavailing. Besides, that they can never be so accommodated to the Bulk of Mankind, as to be generally useful; this great Disadvantage attends them, that they raise more Perplexities in an inquiring Mind than it is in their Power to resolve. Upon the Approach of Death, especially, this will be felt; when, if a Man thinks at all, his Anxiety must naturally increase about the future Concerns of his Soul. Then it is, that the great Importance of the Discoveries of the Gospel will appear: Not only Life and Immortality brought to Light, but the Path opened that leads to Life: A Me­diator discovered: Mercy proclaimed by the Go­vernor of the World, thro' this Mediator, to the Frailties and Errors of those who are peni­tent,  humble and sincere in Heart; and the Presence of their Redeemer promised to con­duct them thro' the Valley of the Shadow of Death, to unseen Habitations of Rest and Glory, where he hath prepared their Place. Here is Ground for good Men's leaving the World with Comfort and Peace. But in this severe and trying Period, this labouring Hour of Nature, how shall the wretched Man sup­port himself, who believes not, or knows not the Hope of Religion? ”Secretly conscious to himself, that he has not acted the Part he ought, the Failings and Vices of his past Life arise be­fore him in sad Remembrance. He wishes to exist after Death; and yet is afraid of that Ex­istence. The Governor of the World is un­known. His Mercy, for any thing that he can tell, may be implored in vain; all is mysterious Obscurity: And in the midst of endless Per­plexities and Doubts, the trembling Soul is for­ced away from the Body. ”As the Misfortunes of Life must have been insupportable to such a Man, so its End is bitter. His setting Sun goes down in a dark Cloud; and the Night of Death closes over his Head, full of Misery. Having no Hope, and being without God, that  is, without the Knowledge of God in the World, are two Things most justly connected by the Apostle, when he is describing the Misery of the Heathen Nations*. Thus, by Means of the Knowledge of the Lord, Man, considered as an Individual, is both improved and comforted. We are next to show,

II. WHAT Benefit he receives from this Knowledge, as a Member of Society. This Branch of the Subject is in Part anticipated, by what has been already said. For all the Im­provement that Man, as an Individual, receives from religious Knowledge, redounds to the Be­nefit of the Publick. Society reaps the Fruits of the Virtue of all its Members; and as each, apart, is made better, the whole must propor­tionably flourish. But, besides this, religious Knowledge has a direct Tendency to improve the social Intercourses of Men, and to assist them in co-operating for common Good.

FOR, first of all, it forms them for Society. It civilizes Mankind. It tames the Fierceness of their Passions, and wears off the Barbarity of their Manners. Without some Notions of Re­ligion,  it is much to be questioned, whether any regular Society ever subsisted, or could subsist, in the World. All those who, in early Times, attempted to reduce wandering and scattered Men unto Society, found it necessary to begin with some Institution of Religion: And the wisest Legislators of old, thro' the whole Pro­gress of their Systems of Government, treated it as necessary and essential to Civil Polity. If even those imperfect Forms of Religion, mixed with so much Error, were important to Socie­ty; how much more, that reasonable and true Worship of God which the Gospel teaches? True Religion introduces the Idea of regular Subjection, by accustoming Mankind to the Awe of superior Power, in the Deity, joined with the Esteem of superior Wisdom and Good­ness. It is, by its Natnre, an associating Prin­ciple, creating new and sacred Bonds of Union amongst Men. Common Assemblies for reli­gious Worship, and the joint Veneration of one God; the Sense of being all, in common, dependent on the same supreme Protection, and bound by the same Ties to Duty, Sharers of the same Benefits of Religion, and Expec­tants of the same Reward; all this has a Ten­dency  to awaken the Sense of our friendly Re­lation, to knit us together, and strengthen our mutual Connection.

FURTHER, religious Knowledge assists in preparing the Way for all useful and ornamen­tal Improvements in Society. It has, in Fact, been found, that, along with the Increase of religious Light, Learning has flourished, and useful Arts have been cultivated and advanced. The true Knowledge of the Lord promotes a free and manly Spirit. It teaches Men to think for themselves, to form their Principles upon a a fair Inquiry unto the Word of God; and not to resign their Consciences implicitely to Men. Hence, it is strongly connected with a Detesta­tion of Oppression of every kind; and forms a Taste for Liberty and Laws. We see that ty­rannical Governments have taken the firmest Root, in Nations blinded by Mahometan and Pagan Darkness, where the Throne of Vio­lence is supported by Ignorance and Error. In the Christian World, as long as Popish Supersti­tion reigned undisturbed, Darkness, Oppression and Slavery were in its Train. For some Cen­turies, the Cloud sat thick and deep over all Eu­rope,  and threatned a Relapse unto ancient Bar­barity: Till, at the auspicious Aera of the Refor­mation, together with the true Knowledge of the Lord, Learning, Liberty and Arts, began to shine forth, and resume their Lustre. At this Day, the Protestant Religion is, in our own, and some other States, the great Bulwark of Liberty. The Promoters of arbitrary Power know this well; and hence, it has been their constant Aim to bear it down; and in place of the Knowledge of the Lord, to establish an im­plicit Submission to the Dictates of Men, in Matters of Religion.

BUT this is not the whole of that happy In­fluence which religious Knowledge hath on Society. It is not only subsidiary to its Im­provement, but necessary to its Preservation. It is the very Basis on which it rests. For re­ligious Principle is what gives Mankind the surest Hold of one another. That last and greatest Pledge of Veracity, an Oath, without which no Society can subsist, derives its whole Authority from the Reverence of God, to whom it is a solemn Appeal. Banish religious Principle, and you loosen all the Bonds of So­ciety:  You shake the fundamental Pillar of all mutual Trust and Confidence amongst Men; nay, you destroy the Security arising from Laws themselves. For human Laws and hu­man Sanctions cannot extend to numberless Cases, in which the Safety of Mankind is high­ly concerned. They would be very ineffectual Means of maintaining the Order and Peace of Society, if there were no Checks upon Men, from the Sense of Divine Legislation; if no Be­lief of Divine Rewards and Punishments were to come in Aid, of what human Rewards and Punishments so imperfectly provide for.

INDEED, the Belief of Religion is of such Importance to publick Welfare, that the most expressive Description we could give of a Soci­ety, in the utmost Circumstances of Disorder, would be to say, There was no Fear of God left amongst them. ”Our Imagination would immediately conceive of them as loose and law­less; abandoned to Rapine and Violence, to Perfidy and Treachery; deceiving and deceived; oppressing and opprest; consumed by intestine Broils, and ripe for becoming a Prey to the first Invader. ”On the other hand, in order to any  Society's flourishing in its highest Perfection and Glory, we need only suppose the Belief of Christian Principles prevailing in such a De­gree, as to exert their entire Influence on the Hearts and Lives of all its Members. Then would the most amiable Scene open. We would see the Causes of publick Disunion instantly re­moved, when Men were once formed to the Pursuit of those higher Interests, which give no Occasion to Competitions and Jealousies; and warmed in Heart with that noble Spirit of Love which our holy Religion breathes; and of which it hath set before us such illustrious Ex­amples in Almighty God, and our blessed Re­deemer. We would see the Principles of Chri­stian Faith shedding over Families, Neighbour­hoods and Communities; the comfortable In­fluences of Unity and Peace, like the Dew of Hermon, and the Dew that descendeth upon the Mountains of Zion, where the Lord commandeth the Blessing, even Life for evermore *. We would see them inspiring private Faith and pub­lick Loyalty; restoring Sobriety of Manners and Simplicity of Life; promoting in every Man Contentment with his Lot, Resignation  to Divine Appointment, continual Regard to the Blessing of Heaven. ”We may extol Riches and Traffick; but, in Truth, the Prevalency of such Principles of publick Virtue and Con­cord, forms the real Strength and Glory of a Nation. In Proportion as these prevail, they give us the Prospect of human Society rising from that sad Degeneracy into which it is at present sunk, and advancing, under the Bles­sing of Heaven, towards that happy Period, when Nation shall not lift up their Sword against Nation, nor War be learned any more *; when there shall be nothing to hurt nor destroy in all the holy Mountain of God.

To convince us yet further of the Impor­tance of religious Knowledge to the Welfare of Society, there is one Consideration which deserves particular Attention. It is this; That if good Seed be not sown in the Field, Tares will infallibly arise. There is a strong Propen­sion in human Nature to Religion: A natural Preparation of the Mind for receiving some Impressions of religious Belief. In ignorant and uncultivated Minds, Superstition or Enthu­siasm  never fail to graft themselves upon this Root. Into what monstrous Forms these have shot forth, and what various Mischiefs they have produced in Society, is too well known. But this is not the whole of the Danger. For designing Men are seldom wanting to take Ad­vantage of popular Weakness; and to improve a superstitious Biass to their own ambitious and interested Ends. Hence Superstition, in itself a formidable Evil, threatens Consequences still more formidable, when it is made the Tool of Ambition and Interest. In this Way Popery has become the Means of enslaving the People, and exalting the Church to exorbitant Power; and, like some baneful Planet, has shed most malignant Influences both on the civil and re­ligious Interests of Christian Society.

As it is the Ignorance of true Religion which gives Rise to those Evils, this furnishes us with one strong Argument, for promoting the Know­ledge of it in the World; that just and rational Principles of Religion may fill up the Room in Mens Minds, which Superstition will otherwise usurp; and the Enemies of Society will make their Advantage of. This brings the Case near­er  to ourselves, by suggesting to us the Condi­tion of that Part of our own Country, upon which the Society for propagating Christian Knowledge have chiefly bestowed their Care. A Part of the Country, which may be consi­dered as yet rude and uncivilized; where Society has scarcely got beyond its Infant State; and whither the Influence of Government and Or­der has very imperfectly reached: Where the Inhabitants, hitherto accustomed to no Subjec­tion, except a slavish Dependence on their Chief­tains, are inured to Rapine, totally negligent of the Arts of Peace, and Strangers to cultivated Life: Where the grossest Ignorance and Su­perstition have remarkably reigned, and have nourished, as their proper Offspring, a blind At­tachment to some pernicious Notions of Go­vernment, artfully instilled into their Minds. If ever the Aid of religious Knowledge was ne­cessary to establish and assist Society, it must be allowed to be necessary here: Especially, as we know Popish Emissaries have not been want­ing among them, to sow their poisonous Prin­ciples; and to foment that disaffected Spirit, the violent Effects of which were felt a few Years ago; when we saw them rushing, like a Torrent  from their own bleak Mountains, to spread Confusion and Terror through a peaceful Land. ”If so many of our Countrymen have hitherto been not only useless, but even danger­ous to the rest of the Society, ought not all wise and good Men to encourage the Design of pro­pagating among them those Principles of true religious Knowledge, which may reform them from Barbarity, and unite them to the rest of the Society? Regard to our own Safety and Tranquility might alone recommend this De­sign, tho' no higher Motive were applied to. The Method, that is employed in carrying it on, must be allowed to be incontestably proper; the Establishment of Schools for the religious Education of Youth, who must otherwise have been void of all moral Culture, and of Course have been the prepared Instruments of Vio­lence and Cruelty. The good Designs of the Legislature for introducing regular Govern­ment, Industry and Arts, into those Parts of the Country, can never be pursued with Success, if Endeavours be not early used, to root out bad Principles, both of Religion and Government, from their Minds, and to plant right ones in their stead. The more directly to co-operate  with the Legislature for civil Good, the Society have not confined themselves to the Care of religious Education; but make it their Endea­vour to banish Idleness, and to instruct Youth in such Arts as may qualify them to be useful Members of Civil Society  .

THESE Considerations directly respect the Good of Society. But, when we take the Ar­gument that has been treated, in its full Extent; when we consider the Importance of religious Knowledge, to the Improvement and the Conso­lation of every Individual, to their present Happi­ness, and their Preparation for future Glory, the Motive for spreading that Knowledge through the World receives a great Addition of Strength. Is it not an affecting Thought, that there should be so many of our Fellow-creatures, nay of our Countrymen, destitute of all those Bless­ings which Man may receive from the Disco­veries of the Gospel; Strangers from the Cove­nant of Promise, having no Hope, and without  God in the World *? What a melancholy View does it give us of human Nature, to think of so many dark Places of the Earth that are full of the Habitations of Cruelty; where, either sunk in total Darkness, or enslaved to wild Super­stition, Mankind pass their wretched Days, scarcely rais'd a Degree above the Beasts that perish! It is noble and generous, to engage in a Design for retrieving Mankind from so much Misery; for advancing at once their temporal and eternal Interests; for bringing so many Souls into the Way of Life, and acquainting them with Him, whom to know is Life eternal   . Such a Design calls upon every Lover of Mankind for Encouragement and Support. As it was un­dertaken from pious and benevolent Views, by the Society erected for this Purpose amongst ourselves, so, by the Progress they have made, we have great Reason to believe it has been car­ried on with Fidelity and Zeal  ¡. Their Con­cern for the Advancement of Religion has not been confined to our native Country. They have sent Missionaries among the Heathen Indians  in our American Colonies, not without Success. In an Undertaking of this Nature, where the Field is so wide, and where so much yet remains to be done, the charitable Assistance of all is most necessary. Those especially who are rich in this World have here an Opportunity put into their Hands by Providence of employing, to the best Advantage, some of that Wealth which they may well spare from the Pomp and Superfluities of Life. This will be laying up in Store for themselves a good Foundation against the Time to come *. This will be the Means of making the Blessings of those, who are now rea­dy to perish through lack of Knowledge, descend at the last upon their Heads. This will be the Ground of joyful and comforting Reflections, when all the Pleasures of Life can please no more. What a Reproach is it to this Age of Va­nity and Pleasure, that no Assistance is denied, and no Expence is spared, to carry on every fa­vourite Scheme of Diversion and Amusement; and only pious and Publick-spirited Undertak­ings are neglected and suffered to languish!

I must mention one Consideration more, which render these Associations of good Men,  to promote Christian Knowledge, the more im­portant, and the more deserving of our Assist­ance at this Day. They are not only the Means of extending Christianity further than it has already reached, but likewise of support­ing the Regard for it at Home. They preserve, at least, the Face of Seriousness amongst us, and contribute to recall something of that Zeal which has so much decayed. This renders them pecu­liarly seasonable now, when a Horror at Super­stition and Enthusiasm seems to have made us in­sensible to the Dangers of Irreligion, and of In­difference about all that is sacred: Tho' this last is certainly much more the general Characte­ristick of the present Times than the former; and threatens that Dissolution of Manners, which, if it become universal, must inevitably carry us with swift Steps to Ruin. As there­fore we have any Regard for the most valuable publick Interests, let us withstand the Torrent of Profanity, by giving all publick Testimonies of a just Concern for the Knowledge and Prin­ciples of our holy Religion. Let us both give them all the Countenance we can at home; and embrace every Occasion Providence gives us of extending their Influence further through the  World. Thus, whilst we act a Part which it is decent and becoming in Christians to act, we shall enjoy the Pleasure of having contributed our Endeavours for bringing about that happy Re­volution foretold by ancient Prophecy: When, in the Stile of Scripture, There shall be one Lord over all the Earth, and his Name, One *. ”When his Name shall be great from the rising to the setting Sun   ; when there shall be nothing to hurt nor destroy in all his holy Mountain; ”but Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field  ¡. ”The Desart shall rejoice and blossom as the Rose *. and The Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord as the Waters cover the Sea.